0  Tractatus logico philosophicus
  1  The world is all that is the case. 
    1.1  The world is the totality of facts, not of things. 
      1.11  The world is determined by the facts, and by their being all the facts.
      1.12  f or the totality of facts determines what is the case, and also whatever is not the case.
      1.13  The facts in logical space are the world. 
    1.2  The world divides into facts. 
      1.21  each item can be the case or not the case while everything else remains the same.
  2  What is the case –  a fact –  is the existence of states of affairs. 
    2.01  a state of affairs (a state of things) is a combination of objects (things).
      2.011  it is essential to things that they should be possible constituents of states of affairs.
      2.012  in logic nothing is accidental: if a thing can occur in a state of affairs, the possibility of that state of affairs must be written into
the thing itself.
        2.0121  it would seem to be a sort of accident, if it turned out that a situ - ation would fit a thing that could already exist entirely on its own.
if things can occur in states of affairs, this possibility must be
in them from the beginning.
(Nothing in the province of logic can be merely possible. Logic
deals with every possibility and all possibilities are its facts.)
Just as we are quite unable to imagine spatial objects outside
space or temporal objects outside time, so there is no object that
we can imagine excluded from the possibility of combining with
others.
if i can imagine objects combined in states of affairs, i cannot
imagine them excluded from the possibility  of such combinations.
        2.0122  Thing are independent in so far as they can occur in all possible situations, but this form of independence is a form of connexion
with states of affairs, a form of dependence. (it is impossible
for words to appear in two different roles: by themselves, and in
propositions.)
        2.0123  if i know an object i also know all its possible occurrences in states of affairs.
(every one of these possibilities must be part of the nature of
the object.)
a new possibility cannot be discovered later.
          2.01231  if i am to know an object, though i need not know its external properties, i must know all its internal properties.
        2.0124  if all objects are given, then at the same time all possible  states of affairs are also given.
      2.013  each thing is, as it were, in a space of possible states of affairs. This space i can imagine empty, but i cannot imagine the thing
without the space.
        2.0131  a spatial object must be situated in infinite space. (a spatial point is an argument- place.)
a speck in the visual field, though it need not be red, must have
some colour: it is, so to speak, surrounded by colour- space. Notes
must have some  pitch, objects of the sense of touch some  degree
of hardness, and so on.
      2.014  objects contain the possibility of all situations. 
        2.0141  The possibility of its occurring in states of affairs is the form of an object.
    2.02  objects are simple. 
      2.0201  every statement about complexes can be resolved into a statement about their constituents and into the propositions that describe
the complexes completely.
      2.021  objects make up the substance of the world. That is why they cannot be composite.
        2.0211  if the world had no substance, then whether a proposition had sense would depend on whether another proposition was true.
        2.0212  in that case we could not sketch any picture of the world (true or false).
      2.022  it is obvious that an imagined world, however different it may be from the real one, must have something –  a form –  in common
with it.
      2.023  objects are just what constitute this unalterable form. 
        2.0231  The substance of the world can only determine a form, and not any material properties. for it is only by means propositions that
material properties are represented –  only by the configuration of
objects that they are produced.
        2.0232  in a manner of speaking, objects are colourless. 
        2.0233  if two objects have the same logical form, the only distinction between them, apart from their external properties, is that they
are different.
          2.02331  either a thing has properties that nothing else has, in which case we can immediately use a description to distinguish it from the
others by and refer to it; or, on the other hand, there are several
things that have the whole set of their properties in common, in
which case it is quite impossible to indicate one of them.
for if there is nothing to distinguish a thing, i cannot distin -
guish it, since otherwise it would be distinguished after all.
      2.024  The substance is what subsists independently of what is the case. 
      2.025  it is form and content. 
        2.0251  space, time, and colour (being coloured) are forms of objects. 
      2.026  There must be objects, if the world is to have unalterable form. 
      2.027  objects, the unalterable, and the subsistent are one and the same. 
        2.0271  object are what is unalterable and subsistent; their configuration is what is changing and unstable.
        2.0272  The configuration of objects produces states of affairs. 
    2.03  in the state of affairs objects fit into one another like the links of a chain.
      2.031  in a state of affairs objects stand in a determinate relation to one another.
      2.032  The determinate way in which objects are connected in a state of affairs is the structure of the state of affairs.
      2.033  f orm is the possibility of structure. 
      2.034  The structure of a fact consists of the structures of states of affairs.
    2.04  The totality of existing states of affairs is the world. 
    2.05  The totality of existing states of affairs also determines which states of affairs do not exist.
    2.06  The existence and non- existence of states of affairs is reality. (We also call the existence of states of affairs a positive fact,
and their non- existence a negative fact.)
      2.061  states of affairs are independent of one another. 
      2.062  from the existence or non- existence of one state of affairs it is impossible to infer the existence or non- existence of another.
      2.063  The sum- total of reality is the world. 752.
What is the case, a fact, is the existence of states of affairs.
    2.1  We picture facts to ourselves. 
      2.11  a picture presents a situation in logical space, the existence and non- existence of states of affairs.
      2.12  a picture is a model of reality. 
      2.13  in a picture objects have the elements of the picture corresponding to them.
        2.131  in a picture the elements of the picture are the representatives of objects.
      2.14  What constitutes a picture is that its elements are related to one another in a determinate way.
        2.141  a picture is a fact. 
      2.15  The fact that the elements of a picture are related to one another in a determinate way represents that things are related to one
another in the same way.
Let us call this connexion of its elements the structure of the
picture, and let us call the possibility of this structure the pictorial
form of the picture.
        2.151  Pictorial form is the possibility that things are related to one another in the same way as the elements of the picture.
          2.1511  That  is how a picture is attached to reality; it reaches right out to it. 
          2.1512  it is laid against reality like a measure. 
            2.15121  only the end- points of the graduating lines touch  the object that is to be measured.
          2.1513  so a picture, conceived in this way, also include the pictorial rela - tionship, which makes it into a picture.
          2.1514  The pictorial relationship consists of the correlations of the picture’s elements with things.
          2.1515  These correlations are, as it were, the feelers of the picture’s elem - ents with which the picture touches reality.
      2.16  if a fact is to be a picture, it must have something in common with what it depicts.
        2.161  There must be something identical in a picture and what it depicts, to enable the one can be a picture of the other at all.
      2.17  What a picture must have in common with reality, in order to be able to depict it after its manner1 –  correctly or incorrectly –  is its
pictorial form.
        2.171  a picture can depict every reality whose form it has. a spatial picture can depict anything spatial, a coloured one
everything coloured, etc.
        2.172  a picture cannot, however, depict its pictorial form; it displays it. 
        2.173  a picture represents its subject from a position outside it (its standpoint is its representational form), therefore3 a picture
represents its subject correctly or incorrectly.
        2.174  a picture cannot, however, place itself outside its representa - tional form.
      2.18  What every2 picture, of whatever form, must have in common with reality, in order to be able to depict it at all –  correctly or
incorrectly –  is logical form, i.e. the form of reality.
        2.181  a picture whose pictorial form is logical form is called a logical picture.
        2.182  every picture is also 4 a logical picture. (on the other hand, not every picture is, for example, a spatial one.)
      2.19  Logical pictures can depict the world. 
    2.2  a picture has logical- pictorial form in common with what it depicts.
      2.201  a picture depicts reality by representing a possibility of existence and non- existence of states of affairs.
      2.202  a picture represents a possible situation in logical space. 
      2.203  a picture contains the possibility of the situation that it represents. 
      2.21  a picture agrees with reality or fails to agree; it is correct or incor - rect, true or false.
      2.22  What a picture represents it represents independently of its truth or falsity, by means of its pictorial form.
        2.221  What a picture represents is its sense. 
        2.222  The agreement or disagreement of its sense with reality constitutes its truth or falsity.
        2.223  in order to tell whether a picture is true or false we must compare it with reality.
        2.224  it is impossible to tell from the picture alone whether it is true or false.
        2.225  There are no pictures that are true a priori . 883. (001)
A logical picture of facts is a thought.
  3  a logical picture of facts is a thought. 
    3.001  ‘a state of affairs is thinkable’: what this means is that we can picture it to ourselves.
    3.01  The totality of true thoughts is a picture of the world. 
    3.02  a thought contains the possibility of the situation of which it is the thought. What is thinkable is possible too.
    3.03  Thought can never be of anything illogical, since, if it were, we should have to think illogically.
      3.031  it used to be said that god could create anything except what would be contrary to the laws of logic. –  The reason being that we
could not say what an ‘illogical’ world would look like.
      3.032  it is as impossible to represent in language anything that ‘contradicts logic’ as in geometry to represent by its co- ordinates
a figure that contradicts the laws of space, or to give the co-
ordinates of a point that does not exist.
        3.0321  Though a state of affairs that would contravene the laws of physics can be represented by us spatially, one that would contra -
vene the laws of geometry cannot.
923.
A logical picture of facts is a thought.
    3.04  if a thought were correct a priori , it would be a thought whose possibility ensured its truth.
    3.05  A priori  knowledge that a thought is true would be possible only if its truth were recognizable from the thought itself (without any -
thing to compare it with).
    3.1  in a proposition a thought finds an expression that can be perceived by the senses.
      3.11  We use the perceptible sign of a proposition (spoken or written, etc.) as a projection of a possible situation.
The method of projection is to think the sense of the proposition.
      3.12  i call the sign with which we express a thought a propositional sign. and a proposition is a propositional sign in its projective
relation to the world.
      3.13  a proposition includes all that the projection includes, but not what is projected.
Therefore, though what is projected is not itself included, its
possibility is.
a proposition, therefore, does not actually contain its sense,
but does contain the possibility of expressing it.
(‘The content of a proposition’ means the content of a propos -
ition that has sense.)
a proposition contains the form, but not the content, of
its sense.
      3.14  What constitutes a propositional sign is that in it its elements (the words) stand in a determinate relation to one another.
a propositional sign is a fact.
        3.141  a proposition is not a blend of words. –  (Just as a theme in music is not a blend of notes.)
a proposition is articulate.
        3.142  only facts can express a sense, a set of names cannot. 
        3.143  although a propositional sign is a fact, this is obscured by the usual form of expression in writing or print.
for in a printed proposition, for example, no essential diffe -
rence is apparent between a propositional sign and a word.
(That is what made it possible for f rege to call a proposition a
composite name.)
          3.1431  The essence of a propositional sign is very clearly seen if we imagine one composed of spatial objects (such as tables, chairs,
books) instead of written signs.
Then the spatial arrangement of these things will express the
sense of the proposition.
          3.1432  instead of, ‘The complex sign “arb” says that a stands to b in the relation r’, we ought to put, ‘ That  “a” stands to “b” in a certain
relation says that arb’.
        3.144  situations can be described but not given names . (Names are like points; propositions like arrows –  they have
sense.)
    3.2  in a proposition a thought can be expressed in such a way that elements of the propositional sign correspond to the objects of
the thought.
      3.201  i call such elements ‘simple signs’ and such a proposition ‘completely analysed’.
      3.202  The simple signs employed in propositions are called names. 
      3.203  a name means an object. The object is its meaning. (‘ a’ is the same sign as ‘ a’.)
      3.21  The configuration of the objects in a situation corresponds to the configuration of simple signs in the propositional sign.
      3.22  in a proposition a name is representative of an object. 
        3.221  objects can only be named . signs are their representatives. i can only speak about  them: i cannot put them into words . Proposition
can only say how things are, not what  they are.
      3.23  The requirement that simple signs be possible is the requirement that sense be determinate.
      3.24  a proposition about a complex stands in an internal relation to a proposition about a constituent of the complex.
a complex can be given only by its description, which will be
right or wrong. a proposition that mentions a complex will not
be nonsensical, if the complex does not exist, but simply false.
When a propositional element signifies a complex, this can be
seen from an indeterminateness in the propositions in which it
occurs. in such cases we know  that the proposition leaves some -
thing undetermined. (in fact the notation for generality contains
a prototype.)
The contraction of a symbol for a complex into a simple symbol
can be expressed in a definition.
      3.25  a proposition has one and only one complete analysis. 
        3.251  What a proposition expresses it expresses in a determinate manner, which can be set out clearly: a proposition is articulated.
      3.26  a name cannot be dissected any further by means of a defin - ition: it is a primitive sign.
        3.261  every sign that has a definition signifies via the signs that serve to define it; and the definitions point the way.
Two signs cannot signify in the same way if one is primitive and
the other is defined by means of primitive signs. Names cannot  be
anatomized by means of definitions. (Nor can any sign that has a
meaning independently and on its own.)
        3.262  What signs fail to express, their application shows. What signs slur over, their application says clearly.
        3.263  The meanings of primitive signs can be explained by means of elucidations. elucidations are propositions that contain the
primitive signs. so they can only be understood if the meanings
of those signs are already known.
    3.3  only propositions have sense; only in the nexus of a proposition does a name have meaning.
      3.31  i call any part of a proposition that characterizes its sense an expression (or a symbol).
(a proposition is itself an expression.)
everything essential to their sense that propositions can have in
common with one another is an expression.
an expression is the mark of a form and a content.
        3.311  an expression presupposes the forms of all the propositions in which it can occur. it is the common characteristic mark of a class
of propositions.
        3.312  it is therefore presented by means of the general form of the propositions that it characterizes.
in fact, in this form the expression will be constant  and every -
thing else variable .
        3.313  Thus an expression is presented by means of a variable whose values are the propositions that contain the expression.
(in the limiting case the variable becomes a constant, the
expression becomes a proposition.)
i call such a variable a ‘propositional variable’.
        3.314  an expression has meaning only in a proposition. all variables can be construed as propositional variables.
(even variable names.)
        3.315  if we turn a constituent of a proposition into a variable, there is a class of propositions all of which are values of the resulting
variable proposition. in general, this class too will be dependent
on the meaning that our arbitrary conventions have given to parts
of the original proposition. But if all the signs in it that have arbi -
trarily determined meaning are turned into variables, we shall still
get a class of this kind. This one, however, is not dependent on
any convention, but solely on the nature of the proposition. it
corresponds to a logical form –  a logical prototype.
        3.317  To stipulate values for a propositional variable is to give the propositions  whose common characteristic the variable is.
The stipulation is a description of those propositions.
The stipulation will therefore be concerned only with symbols,
not with their meaning.
and the only thing essential to the stipulation is that it is merely
a description of symbols and states nothing about what is signified .
how the description of the propositions is produced is not
essential.
        3.318  Like frege and r ussell i construe a proposition as a function of the expressions contained in it.
      3.32  a sign is what can be perceived of a symbol. 
        3.321  so one and the same sign (written or spoken, etc.) can be common to two different symbols –  in which case they will signify in
different ways.
        3.322  our use of the same sign to signify two different objects can never indicate a common characteristic of the two, if we use it with two
different modes of signification . for the sign, of course, is arbi -
trary. so we could choose two different signs instead, and then
what would be left in common on the signifying side?
        3.323  in everyday language it very frequently happens that the same word has different modes of signification –  and so belongs to
different symbols –  or that two words that have different modes of
signification are employed in propositions in what is superficially
the same way.
Thus the word ‘is’ figures as the copula, as a sign for identity,
and as an expression for existence; ‘exist’ figures as an intransitive
verb like ‘go’, and ‘identical’ as an adjective; we speak of some -
thing  but also of something’s  happening.
(in the proposition, ‘green is green’ –  where the first word is the
proper name of a person and the last an adjective –  these words
do not merely have different meanings: they are different symbols .)
        3.324  in this way the most fundamental confusions are easily produced (the whole of philosophy is full of them).
        3.325  in order to avoid these errors we must make use of a sign- language that excludes them by not using the same sign for different symbols
and by not using in a superficially similar way signs that have
different modes of signification: that is to say, a sign- language
that is governed by logical  grammar –  by logical syntax.
(The conceptual notation of f rege and r ussell is such a lan -
guage, though, it is true, it fails to exclude all mistakes.)
        3.327  a sign does not determine a logical form unless it is taken together with its logico- syntactical employment.
        3.328  if a sign is useless , it is meaningless. That is the point of occam’s maxim.
(if everything behaves as if a sign had meaning, then it does
have meaning.)
      3.33  in logical syntax the meaning of a sign should never play a role. it must be possible to establish logical syntax without mentioning
the meaning  of a sign; only the description of expressions may be
presupposed.
        3.331  from this observation we turn to r ussell’s ‘theory of types’. it can be seen that r ussell must be wrong, because he had to mention
the meaning of signs when establishing the rules for them.
        3.332  No proposition can make a statement about itself, because a propositional sign cannot be contained in itself (that is the whole
of the ‘theory of types’).
        3.333  The reason why a function cannot be its own argument is that the sign for a function already contains the prototype of its argu -
ment, and it cannot contain itself.
for let us suppose that the function F(fx)  could be its own
argument: in that case there would be a proposition ‘ F(F(fx)) ’,
in which the outer functions F and the inner function F must have
different meanings, since the inner one has the form φ(fx)  and the
outer one has the form ψ(φ(fx)) . only the letter ‘f’ is common
to the two functions, but the letter by itself signifies nothing.
This immediately becomes clear if instead of ‘ F(F(u)) ’ we
write ‘ (∃φ) : F( φu). φu = Fu ’.
That disposes of r ussell’s paradox.
        3.334  The rules of logical syntax must go without saying, once we know how each individual sign signifies.
      3.34  a proposition possesses essential and accidental features. accidental features are those that result from the particular way
in which the propositional sign is produced. essential features are
those without which the proposition could not express its sense.
        3.341  so what is essential in a proposition is what all propositions that can express the same sense have in common.
and similarly, in general, what is essential in a symbol is what
all symbols that can serve the same purpose have in common.
          3.3411  so one could say that the real name of an object was what all symbols that signified it had in common. Thus, one by one, all
kinds of composition would prove to be unessential to a name.
        3.342  although there is something arbitrary in our notations, this much is not arbitrary –  that when  we have determined one thing arbi -
trarily, something else is necessarily the case. (This derives from
the essence  of notation.)
          3.3421  a particular mode of signifying may be unimportant but it is always important that it is a possible  mode of signifying. and
that is generally so in philosophy: again and again the individual
case turns out to be unimportant, but the possibility of each indi -
vidual case discloses something about the essence of the world.
        3.343  Definitions are rules for translating from one language into another. any correct sign- language must be translatable into
every other in accordance with such rules: it is this that they all
have in common.
        3.344  What signifies in a symbol is what is common to all the symbols that the rules of logical syntax allow us to substitute for it.
          3.3441  for instance, we can express what is common to all notations for truth- functions in the following way: they have in common that,
for example, the notation that uses ‘ ~p’ (‘not p’) and ‘ p v q ’ (‘p or
q’) can be substituted  for any of them.
(This serves to characterize the way in which something general
can be disclosed by the possibility of a specific notation.)
          3.3442  Nor does analysis resolve the sign for a complex in an arbitrary way, so that it would have a different resolution every time that it
was incorporated in a different proposition.
    3.4  a proposition determines a place in logical space. The existence of this logical place is guaranteed by the mere existence of the
constituents –  by the existence of the proposition with a sense.
      3.41  The propositional sign with logical co- ordinates: that is the logical place.
        3.411  in geometry and logic alike a place is a possibility: something can exist in it.
1134. (001- 003)
A thought is a proposition with a sense.
      3.42  a proposition can determine only one place in logical space: never - theless the whole of logical space must already be given by it.
(otherwise negation, logical sum, logical product, etc., would
introduce more and more new elements –  in co- ordination.)
(The logical scaffolding surrounding a picture determines
logical space. The force of a proposition reaches through the
whole of logical space.)
    3.5  a propositional sign, applied and thought out, is a thought. 
  4  a thought is a proposition with a sense. 
    4.001  The totality of propositions is language. 
    4.002  Man possesses the ability to construct languages capable of expressing every sense, without having an idea how each word
has meaning or what its meaning is –  just as people speak without
knowing how the individual sounds are produced.
everyday language is a part of the human organism and is not
less complicated than it.
it is not humanly possible to gather immediately from it what
the logic of language is.
Language disguises thought. so much so, that from the out -
ward form of the clothing it is impossible to infer the form of
the thought beneath it, because the outward form of the clothing
is not designed to reveal the form of the body, but for entirely
different purposes.
The tacit conventions on which the understanding of everyday
language depends are enormously complicated.
    4.003  Most of the propositions and questions to be found in philosoph - ical works are not false, but nonsensical. consequently we cannot
give any answer to questions of this kind, but can only point out
that they are nonsensical. Most of the questions and propositions
of philosophers arise from our failure to understand the logic of
our language.
(They belong to the same class as the question whether the
good is more or less identical than the beautiful.)
and it is not surprising that the deepest problems are in fact not
problems at all.
      4.0031  all philosophy is a ‘critique of language’ (though not in Mauthner’s sense). it was r ussell who performed the service of
showing that the apparent logical form of a proposition need not
be its real one.
1154. (01- 06)
A thought is a proposition with a sense.
    4.01  a proposition is a picture of reality. a proposition is a model of reality as we imagine it.
      4.011  at first sight a proposition –  one set out on the printed page, for example –  does not seem to be a picture of the reality with which
it is concerned. But neither do written notes seem at first sight to
be a picture of a piece of music, nor our phonetic notation (the
alphabet) to be a picture of our speech.
and yet these sign- languages prove to be pictures, even in the
ordinary sense, of what they represent.
      4.012  it is obvious that a proposition of the form ‘ aRb’ strikes us as a picture. in this case the sign is obviously a likeness of what is
signified.
      4.013  and if we penetrate to the essence of this pictorial character, we see that this is not impaired by apparent irregularities  (such as the
use of ♯ and ♭ in musical notation).
for even these irregularities depict what they are intended to
express; only they do it in a different way.
      4.014  a gramophone record, the musical idea, the written notes, and the sound- waves, all stand to one another in the same internal
relation of depicting that holds between language and the world.
They are all constructed according to a common logical pattern.
(Like the two youths in the fairy- tale, their two horses, and
their lilies. They are all in a certain sense one.)
        4.0141  There is a general rule by means of which the musician can obtain the symphony from the score, and which makes it possible to
derive the symphony from the groove on the gramophone record,
and, using the first rule, to derive the score again. That is what
constitutes the inner similarity between these things which seem
to be constructed in such entirely different ways. and that rule is
the law of projection which projects the symphony into the lan -
guage of musical notation. it is the rule for translating this lan -
guage into the language of gramophone records.
      4.015  The possibility of all imagery, of all our pictorial modes of expres - sion, is contained in the logic of depiction.
      4.016  in order to understand the essential nature of a proposition, we should consider hieroglyphic script, which depicts the facts that it
describes.
and alphabet script developed out of it without losing what
was essential to depiction.
    4.02  We can see this from the fact that we understand the sense of a propositional sign without its having been explained to us.
      4.021  a proposition is a picture of reality: for if i understand a propos - ition, i know the situation that it represents. and i understand the
proposition without having had its sense explained to me.
      4.022  a proposition shows  its sense. a proposition shows  how things stand, if it is true.
and it says that  they do so stand.
      4.023  a proposition must restrict reality to two alternatives: yes or no. in order to do that, it must describe reality completely.
a proposition is a description of a state of affairs.
Just as a description of an object describes it by giving its
external properties, so a proposition describes reality by its internal
properties.
a proposition constructs a world with the help of a logical
scaffolding, so that one can actually see from the proposition how
everything stands logically if it is true. one can draw inferences
from a false proposition.
      4.024  To understand a proposition means to know what is the case if it is true.
(one can understand it, therefore, without knowing whether it
is true.)
it is understood by anyone who understands its constituents.
      4.025  When translating one language into another, we do not proceed by translating each proposition  of the one into a proposition  of the
other, but merely by translating the constituents of propositions.
(and the dictionary translates not only substantives, but also
verbs, adjectives, and conjunctions, etc.; and it treats them all in
the same way.)
      4.026  The meanings of simple signs (words) must be explained to us if we are to understand them.
With propositions, however, we make ourselves understood.
      4.027  it belongs to the essence of a proposition that it should be able to communicate a new sense to us.
    4.03  a proposition must use old expressions to communicate a new sense.
a proposition communicates a situation to us, and so it must be
essentially  connected with the situation.
and the connexion is precisely that it is its logical picture.
a proposition states something only in so far as it is a picture.
      4.031  in a proposition a situation is, as it were, constructed by way of experiment.
instead of, ‘This proposition has such and such a sense’, we can
simply say, ‘This proposition represents such and such a situation’.
        4.0311  one name stands for one thing, another for another thing, and they are combined with one another. in this way the whole group –
like a tableau vivant  –  presents a state of affairs.
        4.0312  The possibility of propositions is based on the principle that objects have signs as their representatives.
My fundamental idea is that the ‘logical constants’ are not
representatives; that there can be no representatives of the logic
of facts.
      4.032  it is only in so far as a proposition is logically articulated that it is a picture of a situation.
(even the proposition ‘ ambulo’ is composite: for its stem with
a different ending yields a different sense, and so does its ending
with a different stem.)
    4.04  in a proposition there must be exactly as many distinguishable parts as in the situation that it represents.
The two must possess the same logical (mathematical) multipli -
city. (compare hertz’s Mechanics  on dynamical models.)
      4.041  This mathematical multiplicity, of course, cannot itself be the subject of depiction. one cannot get away from it when depicting.
        4.0411  if, for example, we wanted to express what we now write as ‘( x).fx’ by putting an affix in front of ‘ fx’ –  for instance by writing ‘gen.
fx’ –  it would not be adequate: we should not know what was
being generalized. if we wanted to signalize it with an affix ‘ g’
–  for instance by writing ‘ f(xg)’ –  that would not be adequate
either: we should not know the scope of the generality- sign.
if we were to try to do it by introducing a mark into the
argument- pieces –  for instance by writing
‘(G,G).F(G,G)’
–  it would not be adequate: we should not be able to establish the
identity of the variables. and so on.
all these modes of signifying are inadequate because they lack
the necessary mathematical multiplicity.
        4.0412  for the same reason the idealist’s appeal to ‘spatial spectacles’ is inadequate to explain the seeing of spatial relations, because it
cannot explain the multiplicity of these relations.
    4.05  r eality is compared with propositions. 
    4.06  a proposition can be true or false only in virtue of being a picture of reality.
      4.061  it must not be overlooked that a proposition has a sense that is inde - pendent of the facts: otherwise one can easily suppose that true and
false are relations of equal status between signs and what they signify.
in that case one could say, for example, that ‘ p’ signified in the
true way what ‘ ∼p’ signified in the false way, etc.
      4.062  can we not make ourselves understood with false propositions just as we have done up till now with true ones? –  so long as it is
known that they are meant to be false. –  No! for a proposition is
true if we use it to say that things stand in a certain way, and they
do; and if by ‘ p’ we mean ∼p and things stand as we mean that
they do, then, construed in the new way, ‘ p’ is true and not false.
        4.0621  But it is important that the signs ‘ p’ and ‘ ∼p’ can say the same thing. for it shows that nothing in reality corresponds to the
sign ‘∼’.
The occurrence of negation in a proposition is not enough to
characterize its sense ( ∼∼p = p).
The propositions ‘ p’ and ‘ ∼p’ have opposite sense, but there
corresponds to them one and the same reality.
      4.063  an analogy to illustrate the concept of truth: imagine a black spot on white paper: you can describe the shape of the spot by saying, for
each point on the sheet, whether it is black or white. To the fact that
a point is black there corresponds a positive fact, and to the fact that
a point is white (not black), a negative fact. if i designate a point on
the sheet (a truth- value according to frege), then this corresponds
to the supposition that is put forward for judgement, etc. etc.
But in order to be able to say that a point is black or white, i must
first know when a point is called black, and when white: in order
to be able to say, ‘ “p” is true (or false)’, i must have determined in
what circumstances i call ‘ p’ true, and in so doing i determine the
sense of the proposition.
Now the point where the simile breaks down is this: we can
indicate a point on the paper even if we do not know what black
and white are, but if a proposition has no sense, nothing corres -
ponds to it, since it does not designate a thing (a truth- value)
which might have properties called ‘false’ or ‘true’. The verb of
a proposition is not ‘is true’ or ‘is false’, as f rege thought: rather,
that which ‘is true’ must already contain the verb.
      4.064  every proposition must already  have a sense; it cannot be given a sense by affirmation. indeed its sense is just what is affirmed. and
the same applies to negation, etc.
        4.0641  one could say that negation must be related to the logical place determined by the negated proposition.
The negating proposition determines a logical place different
from that of the negated proposition.
The negating proposition determines a logical place with
the help of the logical place of the negated proposition. f or it
describes it as lying outside the latter’s logical place.
The negated proposition can be negated again, and this in
itself shows that what is negated is already a proposition, and not
merely something that is preliminary to a proposition.
1264.
A thought is a proposition with a sense.
    4.1  Propositions represent the existence and non- existence of states of affairs.
      4.11  The totality of true propositions is the whole of natural science (or the whole corpus of the natural sciences).
        4.111  Philosophy is not one of the natural sciences. (The word ‘philosophy’ must mean something whose place is
above or below the natural sciences, not beside them.)
        4.112  Philosophy aims at the logical clarification of thoughts. Philosophy is not a body of doctrine but an activity.
a philosophical work consists essentially of elucidations.
Philosophy does not result in ‘philosophical propositions’, but
rather in the clarification of propositions.
Without philosophy thoughts are, as it were, cloudy and
indistinct: its task is to make them clear and to give them sharp
boundaries.
          4.1121  Psychology is no more closely related to philosophy than any other natural science.
Theory of knowledge is the philosophy of psychology.
Does not my study of sign- language correspond to the study
of thought- processes, which philosophers used to consider so
essential to the philosophy of logic? only in most cases they got
entangled in unessential psychological investigations, and with
my method too there is an analogous risk.
          4.1122  Darwin’s theory has no more to do with philosophy than any other hypothesis in natural science.
        4.113  Philosophy sets limits to the much disputed sphere of natural science.
        4.114  it must set limits to what can be thought; and, in doing so, to what cannot be thought.
it must set limits to what cannot be thought by working out -
wards through what can be thought.
        4.115  it will signify what cannot be said, by presenting clearly what can be said.
        4.116  everything that can be thought at all can be thought clearly. everything that can be put into words can be put clearly.
      4.12  Propositions can represent the whole of reality, but they cannot represent what they must have in common with reality in order to
be able to represent it –  logical form.
in order to be able to represent logical form, we should have to
be able to station ourselves with propositions somewhere outside
logic, that is to say outside the world.
        4.121  Propositions cannot represent logical form: it is mirrored in them. What finds its reflection in language, language cannot represent.
What expresses itself  in language, we cannot express by means
of language.
Propositions show  the logical form of reality.
They display it.
          4.1211  Thus one proposition ‘ fa’ shows that the object a occurs in its sense, two propositions ‘ fa’ and ‘ ga’ show that that the same object
is mentioned in both of them.
if two propositions contradict one another, then their structure
shows it; the same is true if one of them follows from the other.
and so on.
          4.1212  What can be shown, cannot  be said. 
          4.1213  Now, too, we understand our feeling that once we have a sign- language in which everything is all right, we already have a correct
logical point of view.
        4.122  in a certain sense we can talk about formal properties of objects and states of affairs, or, in the case of facts, about structural prop -
erties: and in the same sense about formal relations and structural
relations.
(instead of ‘structural property’ i also say ‘internal property’;
instead of ‘structural relation’, ‘internal relation’.
i introduce these expressions in order to indicate the source
of the confusion between internal relations and relations
proper (external relations), which is very widespread among
philosophers.)
it is impossible, however, to assert by means of propositions
that such internal properties and relations obtain: rather, this
makes itself manifest in the propositions that represent the rele -
vant states of affairs and are concerned with the relevant objects.
          4.1221  an internal property of a fact can also be called a feature of that fact. (in the sense in which we speak of facial features, for
example.)5
        4.123  a property is internal if it is unthinkable that its object should not possess it.
(This shade of blue and that one stand, eo ipso, in the internal
relation of lighter to darker. it is unthinkable that these  two
objects should not stand in this relation.)
(here the shifting use of the word ‘object’ corresponds to the
shifting use of the words ‘property’ and ‘relation’.)
        4.125  The existence of an internal relation between possible situations expresses itself in language by means of an internal relation
between the propositions representing them.
          4.1251  here we have the answer to the vexed question ‘whether all relations are internal or external’.
          4.1252  i call a series that is ordered by an internal  relation a series of forms.
The order of the number- series is not governed by an external
relation but by an internal relation.
The same is true of the series of propositions
‘aRb’,
‘(∃x) : aRx ∙ xRb’,
‘(∃x, y) : aRx ∙ xRy ∙ yRb’,
and so forth.
(if b stands in one of these relations to a, i call b a successor of a.)
        4.126  We can now talk about formal concepts, in the same sense that we speak of formal properties.
(i introduce this expression in order to exhibit the source of the
confusion between formal concepts and concepts proper, which
pervades the whole of traditional logic.)
When something falls under a formal concept as one of its
objects, this cannot be expressed by means of a proposition.
instead it is shown in the very sign for this object. (a name shows
that it signifies an object, a sign for a number that it signifies a
number, etc.)
formal concepts cannot, in fact, be represented by means of a
function, as concepts proper can.
for their characteristics, formal properties, are not expressed
by means of functions.
The expression for a formal property is a feature of certain
symbols.
so the sign for the characteristics of a formal concept is a dis -
tinctive feature of all symbols whose meanings fall under the
concept.
so the expression for a formal concept is a propositional vari -
able in which this distinctive feature alone is constant.
        4.127  The propositional variable signifies the formal concept, and its values signify the objects that fall under the concept.
          4.1271  every variable is the sign for a formal concept. for every variable represents a constant form that all its values
possess, and this can be regarded as a formal property of those values.
          4.1272  Thus the variable name ‘x’ is the proper sign of the pseudo- concept object .
Wherever the word ‘object’ (‘thing’, etc.) is correctly used, it is
expressed in conceptual notation by a variable name.
for example, in the proposition, ‘There are 2 objects which ...’,
it is expressed by ‘( ∃x,y)...’.
Wherever it is used in a different way, that is as a proper concept-
word, nonsensical pseudo- propositions are the result.
so one cannot say, for example, ‘There are objects’, as one
might say, ‘There are books’. and it is just as impossible to say,
‘There are 100 objects’, or, ‘There are ℵ0 objects’.
and it is nonsensical to speak of the total number of objects .
The same applies to the words ‘complex’, ‘fact’, ‘function’,
‘number’, etc.
They all signify formal concepts, and are represented in con -
ceptual notation by variables, not by functions or classes. (as
frege and r ussell believed.)7
‘1 is a number’, ‘There is only one zero’, and all similar
expressions are nonsensical.
(it is just as nonsensical to say, ‘There is only one 1’, as it would
be to say, ‘2 + 2 at 3 o’clock equals 4’.)
            4.12721  a formal concept is given immediately any object falling under it is given. it is not possible, therefore, to introduce as primi -
tive ideas objects belonging to a formal concept and the formal
concept itself. so it is impossible, for example, to introduce
as primitive ideas both the concept of a function and specific
functions, as r ussell does; or the concept of a number and par -
ticular numbers. existence and non- existence.
of these states of affairs any combinations can exist and the
remainder not exist.
          4.1273  if we want to express in conceptual notation the general propos - ition, ‘ b is a successor of a’, then we require an expression for the
general term of the series of forms
arb,
(∃x) : arx ∙ xrb,
(∃x, y) : arx ∙ xry ∙ yrb,
…
137in order to express the general term of a series of forms, we
must use a variable, because the concept ‘term of that series
of forms’ is a formal  concept. (This is what f rege and russell
overlooked: consequently the way in which they want to express
general propositions like the one above is incorrect; it contains a
vicious circle.)
We can determine the general term of a series of forms by
giving its first term and the general form of the operation that
produces the next term out of the proposition that precedes it.
          4.1274  To ask whether a formal concept exists is nonsensical. f or no proposition can be the answer to such a question.
(so, for example, the question, ‘ are there unanalysable subject-
predicate propositions?’ cannot be asked.)
        4.128  Logical forms are without  number. hence there are no pre- eminent numbers in logic, and hence
there is no possibility of philosophical monism or dualism, etc.
        4.1241  one cannot6 distinguish forms from one another by saying that one has this property, and another that property: for this presupposes
that it makes sense to ascribe either property to either form.
    4.2  The sense of a proposition is its agreement and disagreement with possibilities of existence and non- existence of states of affairs.
      4.28  There correspond to these combinations the same number of pos - sibilities of truth –  and falsity –  for n elementary propositions.4.2
The sense of a proposition is its agreement and disagreement with
possibilities of existence and non- existence of states of affairs.
      4.21  The simplest kind of proposition, an elementary proposition, asserts the existence of a state of affairs.
        4.211  it is a sign of a proposition’s being elementary that there can be no elementary proposition contradicting it.
      4.22  an elementary proposition consists of names. it is a nexus, a con - catenation, of names.
        4.221  it is obvious that the analysis of propositions must bring us to elementary propositions which consist of names in immediate
combination.
This raises the question how such combination into propos -
itions comes about.
          4.2211  even if the world is infinitely complex, so that every fact consists of infinitely many states of affairs and every state of affairs is
composed of infinitely many objects, there would still have to be
objects and states of affairs.
      4.23  it is only in the nexus of an elementary proposition that a name occurs in a proposition.
      4.24  Names are the simple symbols: i indicate them by single letters (‘x’, ‘y’, ‘z’).
i write elementary propositions as functions of names, so that
they have the form: ‘ fx’, ‘φ(x,y) ’, etc.
or i indicate them by the letters p, q, r.
        4.241  When i use two signs with one and the same meaning, i express this by putting the sign ‘=’ between them.
so ‘a = b ’ means that the sign ‘ b’ can be substituted for the
sign ‘ a’.
(if i use an equation to introduce a new sign ‘ b’, laying down
that it shall serve as a substitute for a sign ‘ a’ that is already
known, then, like r ussell, i write the equation –  definition –  in
the form ‘ a = b  Def.’ a definition is a rule dealing with signs.)
        4.242  expressions of the form ‘ a=b’ are, therefore, mere representa - tional devices. They state nothing about the meaning of the signs
‘a’ and ‘ b’.
        4.243  can we understand two names without knowing whether they signify the same thing or two different things? –  can we under -
stand a proposition in which two names occur without knowing
whether their meaning is the same or different?
suppose i know the meaning of an english word and of a
german word that means the same: then it is impossible for me
to be unaware that they do mean the same; i must be capable of
translating each into the other.
expressions like ‘ a=a’, and those derived from them, are nei -
ther elementary propositions nor is there any other way in which
they have sense. (This will become evident later.)
      4.25  if an elementary proposition is true, the state of affairs exists; if an elementary proposition is false, the state of affairs does
not exist.
      4.26  if all true elementary propositions are given, the result is a com - plete description of the world. The world is completely described
by giving all elementary propositions, and adding which of them
are true and which false.
      4.27  f or n states of affairs, there are Kn vnn
v=


=∑
    4.3  Truth- possibilities of elementary propositions mean possibilities of existence and non- existence of states of affairs.
      4.31  We can represent truth- possibilities by schemata of the following kind (‘T’ means ‘true’, ‘f’ means ‘false’; the rows of ‘T’s’ and ‘f’s’
under the row of elementary propositions symbolize their truth-
possibilities in a way that can easily be understood):
pqr pq p
TTT TT T
FTT fT f
TfT Tf
TTf ff
FfT
FTf
Tff
fff
    4.4  a proposition is an expression of agreement and disagreement with truth- possibilities of elementary propositions.
      4.41  Truth- possibilities of elementary propositions are the conditions of the truth and falsity of propositions.
        4.411  it immediately strikes one as probable that the introduction of elementary propositions provides the basis for understanding all
other kinds of proposition. indeed the understanding of general
propositions palpably  depends on the understanding of elemen -
tary propositions.
      4.42  f or n elementary propositions there are K xLn
xK
nn

=
=∑
      4.43  We can express agreement with truth- possibilities by correlating the mark ‘T’ (true) with them in the schema.
The absence of this mark means disagreement.
        4.431  The expression of agreement and disagreement with the truth- possibilities of elementary propositions expresses the truth-
conditions of a proposition.
a proposition is the expression of its truth- conditions.
(Thus frege was quite right to use them as a starting point when
he explained the signs of his conceptual notation. But the explan -
ation of the concept of truth that f rege gives is mistaken: if ‘the
true’ and ‘the false’ were really objects, and were the arguments
in ∼p etc., then frege’s method of determining the sense of ‘ ∼p’
would leave it absolutely undetermined.)
      4.44  The sign that results from the correlating the mark ‘T’ with truth- possibilities is a propositional sign.
        4.441  it is clear that a complex of the signs ‘f’ and ‘T’ has no object (or complex of objects) corresponding to it, just as there is none
corresponding to the horizontal and vertical lines or to the
brackets. –  There are no ‘logical objects’.
of course the same applies to all signs that express what the
schemata of ‘T’s’ and ‘f’s’ express.
        4.442  f or example, the following is a propositional sign: ‘
p q
T T T
FT T
T f
f f T
’
(frege’s ‘judgement- stroke’ ‘ ├─’ is logically quite meaning -
less: in the works of f rege (and r ussell) it simply indicates that
these authors hold the propositions marked with this sign to be
true. Thus ‘ ├─’ is no more a component part of a proposition
than is, for instance, the proposition’s number. it is quite impos -
sible for a proposition to state that it itself is true.)
if the order of the truth- possibilities in a schema is fixed once
and for all by a combinatory rule, then the last column by itself
will be an expression of the truth- conditions. if we now write this
column as a row, the propositional sign will become
‘(T T -  T) (p, q)’,
or more explicitly
‘(T T f T) (p, q)’.
(The number of places in the left- hand pair of brackets is
determined by the number of terms in the right- hand pair.)
      4.45  f or n elementary propositions there are Ln possible groups of truth- conditions.
The groups of truth- conditions that are obtainable from the
truth- possibilities of a given number of elementary propositions
can be arranged in a series.
      4.46  among the possible groups of truth- conditions there are two extreme cases.
in one of these cases the proposition is true for all the truth-
possibilities of the elementary propositions. We say that the truth-
conditions are tautological .
in the second case the proposition is false for all the truth-
possibilities: the truth- conditions are contradictory .
in the first case we call the proposition a tautology; in the
second, a contradiction.
        4.461  Propositions show what they say: tautologies and contradictions show that they say nothing.
a tautology has no truth- conditions, since it is unconditionally
true: and a contradiction is true on no condition.
Tautologies and contradictions lack sense.
(Like a point from which two arrows go out in opposite
directions to one another.)
(for example, i know nothing about the weather when i know
that it is either raining or not raining.)
          4.4611  Tautology and contradiction are not, however, nonsensical. They are part of the symbolism, much as ‘0’ is part of the symbolism of
arithmetic.
        4.462  Tautology and contradiction are not pictures of the reality. They do not represent any possible situations. f or the former admits all
possible situations, and the latter none .
in a tautology the conditions of agreement with the world –  the
representational relations –  cancel one another, so that it does not
stand in any representational relation to reality.
        4.463  The truth- conditions of a proposition determine the range that it leaves open to the facts.
(a proposition, a picture, or a model is, in the negative sense,
like a solid body that restricts the freedom of movement of others,
and, in the positive sense, like a space bounded by solid substance
in which there is room for a body.)
a tautology leaves open to reality the whole –  the infinite
whole –  of logical space: a contradiction fills the whole of logical
space leaving no point of it for reality. Thus neither of them can
determine reality in any way.
        4.465  The logical product of a tautology and a proposition says the same thing as the proposition. This product, therefore, is identical
with the proposition. f or it is impossible to alter what is essential
to a symbol without altering its sense.
        4.466  What corresponds to a determinate logical combination of signs is a determinate logical combination of their meanings. it is
only to the uncombined signs that absolutely any  combination
corresponds.
in other words, propositions that are true for every situation
cannot be combinations of signs at all, since, if they were, only
determinate combinations of objects could correspond to them.
(and what is not a logical combination has no combination of
objects corresponding to it.)
Tautology and contradiction are the limiting cases –  indeed the
disintegration –  of the combination of signs.
          4.4661  admittedly the signs are still combined with one another even in tautologies and contradictions, i.e. they stand in certain relations
to one another: but these relations have no meaning, they are not
essential to the symbol .
    4.5  it now seems possible to give the most general propositional form: that is, to give a description of the propositions of any sign-
language whatsoever  in such a way that every possible sense can
be expressed by a symbol satisfying the description, and every
symbol satisfying the description can express a sense, provided
that the meanings of the names are suitably chosen.
it is clear that only what is essential to the most general propos -
itional form may be included in its description –  for otherwise it
would not be the most general form.
The existence of a general propositional form is proved by the
fact that there cannot be a proposition whose form could not have
been foreseen (i.e. constructed). The general form of a propos -
ition is: This is how things stand.
      4.51  suppose that i am given all elementary propositions: then i can simply ask what propositions i can construct out of them. and
there i have all propositions, and that fixes their limits.
      4.52  Propositions comprise all that follows from the totality of all elem - entary propositions (and, of course, from its being the totality  of
them all). (Thus, in a certain sense, it could be said that all prop -
ositions were generalizations of elementary propositions.)
      4.53  The general proposition form is a variable. 1545. (01- 02)
A proposition is a truth- function of elementary propositions.
(An elementary proposition is a truth- function of itself.)
  5  a proposition is a truth- function of elementary propositions. (an elementary proposition is a truth- function of itself.)
    5.01  elementary propositions are the truth- arguments of propositions. 
    5.02  The arguments of functions are readily confused with the affixes of names. f or both arguments and affixes enable me to recognize
the meaning of the signs containing them.
for example, when r ussell writes ‘+c’, the ‘c’ is an affix which
indicates that the sign as a whole is the addition- sign for cardinal
numbers. But the use of this sign is the result of arbitrary conven -
tion and it would be quite possible to choose a simple sign instead
of ‘+c’; in ‘∼p’, however, ‘ p’ is not an affix but an argument: the
sense of ‘ ∼p’ cannot  be understood unless the sense of ‘ p’ has been
understood already. (in the name Julius caesar ‘Julius’ is an affix.
an affix is always part of a description of the object to whose
name we attach it: e.g. the caesar of the Julian gens.)
if i am not mistaken, f rege’s theory about the meaning of
propositions and functions is based on the confusion between an
argument and an affix. f rege regarded the propositions of logic
as names, and their arguments as the affixes of those names.
1555.
A proposition is a truth- function of elementary propositions.
(An elementary proposition is a truth- function of itself.)
    5.1  Truth- functions can be arranged in series. That is the foundation of the theory of probability.
      5.101  The truth- functions of a given number of elementary propos - itions can always be set out in a schema of the following kind:
(T T T T) ( p, q) Tautology (if p then p, and if q then q) (p ⊃ p ∙ q ⊃ q)
(f T T T) ( p, q) in words: Not both p and q. (~(p ∙ q))
(T f T T) ( p, q) "        "   : if q then p. (q ⊃ p)
(T T f T) ( p, q) "        "   : if p then q. (p ⊃ q)
(T T T f) ( p, q) "        "   : p or q. (p v q)
(f f T T) ( p, q) "        "   : Not q. (~q)
(f T f T) ( p, q) "        "   : Not p. (~p)
(f T T f) ( p, q) "        "   : p or q, but not both. ( p ∙ ~q : v : q ∙ ~p)
(T f f T) ( p, q) "        "   : if p then q; and if q then p. (p ≡ q)
(T f T f) ( p, q) "        "   : p
(T T f f) ( p, q) "        "   : q
(f f f T) ( p, q) "        "   : Neither p nor q. (~p ∙ ~q  or  p|q)
(f f T f) ( p, q) "        "   : p and not q. (p ∙ ~q)
(f T f f) ( p, q) "        "   : q and not p. (q ∙ ~p)
(T f f f) ( p, q) "        "   : q and p. (q ∙ p)
(f f f f) ( p, q) contradiction ( p and not p; and q and not q.) (p ∙ ~p ∙ q ∙ ~q)
i will give the name truth- grounds  of a proposition to those
truth- possibilities of its truth- arguments that make it true.
      5.11  if all the truth- grounds that are common to a number of propos - itions are at the same time truth- grounds of a certain proposition,
then we say that the truth of that proposition follows from the
truth of the others.
      5.12  in particular, the truth of a proposition ‘ p’ follows from the truth of another proposition ‘ q’ if all the truth- grounds of the latter are
truth- grounds of the former.
        5.121  The truth- grounds of the one are contained in those of the other: p follows from q.
        5.122  if p follows from q, the sense of ‘ p’ is contained in the sense of ‘ q’. 
        5.123  if a god creates a world in which certain propositions are true, then by that very act he also creates a world in which all the prop -
ositions that follow from them come true. and similarly he could
not create a world in which the proposition ‘ p’ was true without
creating all its objects.
        5.124  a proposition affirms every proposition that follows from it. 
          5.1241  ‘ p ∙ q’ is one of the propositions that affirm ‘ p’ and at the same time one of the propositions that affirm ‘ q’.
Two propositions are opposed to one another if there is no
proposition with a sense, that affirms them both.
every proposition that contradicts another negates it.
      5.13  When the truth of one proposition follows from the truth of others, we can see this from the structure of the propositions.
        5.131  if the truth of one proposition follows from the truth of others, this finds expression in relations in which the forms of the prop -
ositions stand to one another: nor is it necessary for us to set
up these relations between them, by combining them with one
another in a single proposition; on the contrary, the relations are
internal, and their existence is an immediate result of the exist -
ence of the propositions.
          5.1311  When we infer q from p v q and ∼p, the relation between the prop - ositional forms of ‘ p v q’ and ‘ ∼p’ is masked, in this case, by our
mode of signifying. But if instead of ‘ p v q’ we write, for example,
‘p|q.|.p|q’, and instead of ‘ ∼p’, ‘p|p’ (p |q = neither p nor q), then
the inner connexion becomes obvious.
(The possibility of inference from ( x).fx to fa shows that the
symbol ( x).fx itself has generality in it.)
        5.132  if p follows from q, i can make an inference from q to p, deduce p from q.
The nature of the inference can be gathered only from the two
propositions.
They themselves are the only possible justification of the
inference.
‘Laws of inference’, which are supposed to justify inferences, as
in the works of f rege and r ussell, have no sense, and would be
superfluous.
        5.133  all deductions are made a priori. 
        5.134  one elementary proposition cannot be deduced from another. 
        5.135  There is no possible way of making an inference from the exist - ence of one situation to the existence of another, entirely different
situation.
        5.136  There is no causal nexus to justify such an inference. 
          5.1361  We cannot  infer the events of the future from those of the present. Belief in the causal nexus is the real superstition .9
          5.1362  The freedom of the will consists in the impossibility of knowing actions that still lie in the future. We could know them only if
causality were an inner  necessity like that of logical inference. –
The connexion between knowledge and what is known is that of
logical necessity.
(‘A knows that p is the case’, has no sense if p is a tautology.)
          5.1363  if the truth of a proposition does not follow  from the fact that it is self- evident to us, then its self- evidence in no way justifies our
belief in its truth.
      5.14  if one proposition follows from another, then the latter says more than the former, and the former less than the latter.
        5.141  if p follows from q and q from p, then they are one and the same proposition.
        5.142  a tautology follows from all propositions: it says nothing. 
        5.143  contradiction is that common factor of propositions which no proposition has in common with another. Tautology is the
common factor of all propositions that have nothing in common
with one another.
contradiction, one might say, vanishes outside all propos -
itions: tautology vanishes inside them.
contradiction is the outer limit of propositions: tautology is
the unsubstantial point at their centre.
      5.15  if Tr is the number of the truth- grounds of a proposition ‘ r’, and if Trs is the number of the truth- grounds of a proposition ‘ s’ that
are at the same time truth- grounds of ‘ r’, then we call the ratio
Trs : Tr the degree of probability  that the proposition ‘ r’ gives to
the proposition ‘ s’.
        5.151  in a schema like the one above in 5.101, let Tr be the number of ‘T’s’ in the proposition r, and let Trs be the number of ‘ T’s’ in the
proposition s that stand in columns in which the proposition r has
‘T’s’. Then the proposition r gives to the proposition s the prob -
ability Trs : Tr.
          5.1511  There is no special object peculiar to probability propositions. 
        5.152  When propositions have no truth- arguments in common with one another, we call them independent of one another.
Two elementary propositions give one another the prob -
ability ½.
if p follows from q, then the proposition ‘ q’ gives to the prop -
osition ‘ p’ the probability 1. The certainty of logical inference is a
limiting case of probability.
(application of this to tautology and contradiction.)
        5.153  in itself, a proposition is neither probable nor improbable. either an event occurs or it does not: there is no middle way.
        5.154  suppose that an urn contains black and white balls in equal numbers (and none of any other kind). i draw one ball after
another, putting them back into the urn. By this experiment i can
establish that the number of black balls drawn and the number
of white balls drawn approximate to one another as the draw
continues.
so this is not a mathematical truth.
Now, if i say, ‘The probability of my drawing a white ball is
equal to the probability of my drawing a black one’, this means
that all the circumstances that i know of (including the laws of
nature assumed as hypotheses) give no more  probability to the
occurrence of the one event than to that of the other. That is to
165say, they give each the probability ½, as can easily be gathered
from the above definitions.
What i confirm by the experiment is that the occurrence of the
two events is independent of the circumstances of which i have no
more detailed knowledge.
        5.155  The minimal unit for a probability proposition is this: The circumstances –  of which i have no further knowledge –  give
such and such a degree of probability to the occurrence of a par -
ticular event.
        5.156  it is in this way that probability is a generalization. it involves a general description of a propositional form.
We use probability only in default of certainty –  if our know -
ledge of a fact is not indeed complete, but we do know something
about its form.
(a proposition may well be an incomplete picture of a certain
situation, but it is always a complete picture of something .)
a probability proposition is a sort of excerpt from other
propositions.
    5.2  The structures of propositions stand in internal relations to one another.
      5.21  in order to give prominence to these internal relations we can adopt the following mode of expression: we can represent a prop -
osition as the result of an operation that produces it out of other
propositions (which are the bases of the operation).
      5.22  an operation is the expression of a relation between the structures of its result and of its bases.
      5.23  The operation is what has to be done to the one proposition in order to make the other out of it.
        5.231  and that will, of course, depend on their formal properties, on the internal similarity of their forms.
        5.232  The internal relation by which a series is ordered is equivalent to the operation that produces one term from another.
        5.233  operations cannot make their appearance before the point at which one proposition is generated out of another in a logically
meaningful way; i.e. the point at which the logical construction of
propositions begins.
        5.234  Truth- functions of elementary propositions are results of operations with elementary propositions as bases. (These
operations i call truth- operations.)
          5.2341  The sense of a truth- function of p is a function of the sense of p. Negation, logical addition, logical multiplication, etc. etc. are
operations.
(Negation reverses the sense of a proposition.)
      5.24  an operation manifests itself in a variable; it shows how we can get from one form of proposition to another.
it gives expression to the difference between the forms.
(and what the bases of an operation and its result have in
common is just the bases themselves.)
        5.241  an operation is not the mark of a form, but only of a difference between forms.
        5.242  The operation that produces ‘ q’ from ‘ p’ also produces ‘ r’ from ‘q’, and so on. There is only one way of expressing this: ‘ p’, ‘q’, ‘r’,
etc. have to be variables that give expression in a general way to
certain formal relations.
      5.25  The occurrence of an operation does not characterize the sense of a proposition.
indeed, no statement is made by an operation, but only by its
result, and this depends on the bases of the operation.
(operation and function must not be confused with each other.)
        5.251  a function cannot be its own argument, whereas an operation can take one of its own results as its base.
        5.252  it is only in this way that the step from one term of a series of forms to another is possible (from one type to another in the
hierarchies of r ussell and Whitehead). (r ussell and Whitehead
did not admit the possibility of such steps, but repeatedly availed
themselves of it.)
          5.2521  if an operation is applied repeatedly to its own results, i speak of successive applications of it. ( ‘O’O’O’a ’ is the result of three
successive applications of the operation ‘ O’ξ’ to ‘ a’.)
in a similar sense i speak of successive applications of more
than one  operation to a number of propositions.
          5.2522  accordingly i use the sign ‘[ a, x, O’x ]’ for the general term of the series of forms a, O’a, O’O’a,  … . This bracketed expression is a
variable: the first term of the bracketed expression is the begin -
ning of the series of forms, the second is the form of a term x
arbitrarily selected from the series, and the third is the form of the
term that immediately follows x in the series.
          5.2523  The concept of successive applications of an operation is equiva - lent to the concept ‘and so on’.
        5.253  one operation can counteract the effect of another. operations can cancel one another.
        5.254  an operation can vanish (e.g. negation in ‘ ∼∼p’: ∼∼p = p ). 
    5.3  all propositions are results of truth- operations on elementary propositions.
a truth- operation is the way in which a truth- function is
produced out of elementary propositions.
it is of essence of truth- operations that, just as elementary
propositions yield a truth- function of themselves, so too in the
same way truth- functions yield a further truth- function. When a
truth- operation is applied to truth- functions of elementary prop -
ositions, it always generates another truth- function of elementary
propositions, another proposition. When a truth- operation is
applied to the results of truth- operations on elementary propos -
itions, there is always a single  operation on elementary propos -
itions that has the same result.
every proposition is the result of truth- operations on elemen -
tary propositions.
      5.31  The schemata in 4.31 have a meaning even when ‘ p’, ‘q’, ‘r’, etc. are not elementary propositions.
and it is easy to see that the propositional sign in 4.442 expresses
a single truth- function of elementary propositions even when ‘ p’
and ‘ q’ are truth- functions of elementary propositions.
      5.32  all truth- functions are results of successive applications to elem - entary propositions of a finite number of truth- operations.
    5.4  here8 it becomes manifest that there are no ‘logical objects’ or ‘logical constants’ (in f rege’s and r ussell’s sense).
      5.41  The reason is that the results of truth- operations on truth- functions are always identical whenever they are one and the same
truth- function of elementary propositions.
      5.42  it is self- evident that v, ⊃, etc. are not relations in the sense in which right and left etc. are relations.
The interdefinability of f rege’s and r ussell’s ‘primitive signs’
of logic is enough to show that they are not primitive signs, still
less signs for relations.
and it is obvious that the ‘ ⊃’ defined by means of ‘ ∼’ and ‘v’ is
identical with the one that figures with ‘ ∼’ in the definition of ‘v’;
and that the second ‘v’ is identical with the first one; and so on.
      5.43  even at first sight it seems scarcely credible that there should follow from one fact p infinitely many others , namely ∼∼p, ∼∼∼∼p, etc.
and it is no less remarkable that the infinite number of propos -
itions of logic (mathematics) follow from half a dozen ‘primitive
propositions’.
But in fact all the propositions of logic say the same thing, to
wit nothing.
      5.44  Truth- functions are not material functions. for example, an affirmation can be produced by double neg -
ation: in such a case does it follow that in some sense negation is
contained in affirmation? Does ‘ ∼∼p’ negate ∼p, or does it affirm
p –  or both?
The proposition ‘ ∼∼p’ is not about negation, as if negation
were an object: on the other hand, the possibility of negation is
already written into affirmation.
and if there were an object called ‘ ∼’, it would follow that
‘∼∼p’ said something different from what ‘ p’ said, just because the
one proposition would then be about ∼ and the other would not.
        5.441  This vanishing of the apparent logical constants also occurs in the case of ‘ ∼(∃x).∼fx’, which says the same as ‘( x).fx’, and in the
case of ‘( ∃x).fx . x=a’, which says the same as ‘ fa’.
        5.442  if we are given a proposition, then with it  we are also given the results of all truth- operations that have it as their base.
      5.46  if we introduced logical signs properly, then we should also have introduced at the same time the sense of all combinations of them;
i.e. not only ‘ p v q’ but ‘ ∼(p v ∼q)’ as well, etc. etc. We should also
have introduced at the same time the effect of all possible combin -
ations of brackets. and thus it would have been made clear that
the real general primitive signs are not ‘ p v q’, ‘(∃x).fx’, etc. but
the most general form of their combinations.
        5.461  Though it seems unimportant, it is in fact significant that the pseudo- relations of logic, such as v and ⊃, need brackets –  unlike
real relations.
indeed, the use of brackets with these apparently primitive
signs is itself an indication that they are not the real primitive
signs. and surely no one is going to believe that brackets have an
independent meaning.
          5.4611  signs for logical operations are punctuation- marks. 
      5.47  it is clear that whatever we can say in advance  about the form of all propositions, we must be able to say all at once.
an elementary proposition really contains all logical operations
in itself. f or ‘fa’ says the same thing as ‘( ∃x).fx . x=a’.
Wherever there is compositeness, argument and function are
present, and where these are present, we already have all the
logical constants.
one could say that the sole logical constant was what all prop -
ositions, by their very nature, had in common with one another.
But that is the general propositional form.
        5.471  The general propositional form is the essence of a proposition. 
          5.4711  To give the essence of a proposition means to give the essence of all description, and thus the essence of the world.
        5.472  The description of the most general propositional form is the description of the one and only general primitive sign in logic.
        5.473  Logic must look after itself. if a sign is possible , then it is also capable of signifying.
Whatever is possible in logic is also permitted. (The reason why
‘socrates is identical’ means nothing is that there is no property
called ‘identical’. The proposition is nonsensical because we have
failed to make an arbitrary determination, and not because the
symbol, in itself, would be illegitimate.)
in a certain sense, we cannot make mistakes in logic.
          5.4731  self- evidence, which r ussell talked about so much, can become dispensable in logic, only because language itself prevents every
logical mistake. –  What makes logic a priori is the impossibility  of
illogical thought.
          5.4732  We cannot give a sign the wrong sense. 
            5.47321  occam’s maxim is, of course, not an arbitrary rule, nor one that is justified by its success in practice: its point is that unnecessary
units in a sign- language mean nothing.
signs that serve one purpose are logically equivalent, and
signs that serve none  are logically meaningless.
          5.4733  frege says that any legitimately constructed proposition must have a sense. and i say that any possible proposition is legitim -
ately constructed, and, if it has no sense, that can only be because
we have failed to give a meaning  to some of its constituents.
(even if we think that we have done so.)
Thus the reason why ‘socrates is identical’ says nothing is
that we have not given any adjectival  meaning to the word ‘iden -
tical’. f or when it appears as a sign for identity, it symbolizes in
an entirely different way –  the signifying relation is a different
one –  therefore the symbols also are entirely different in the two
cases: the two symbols have only the sign in common, and that is
an accident.
        5.474  The number of fundamental operations that are necessary depends solely  on our notation.
        5.475  all that is required is that we should construct a system of signs with a particular number of dimensions –  with a particular math -
ematical multiplicity.
        5.476  it is clear that this is not a question of a number of primitive ideas that have to be signified, but rather of the expression of a rule.
      5.451  if logic has primitive ideas, they must be independent of one another. if a primitive idea has been introduced, it must have
been introduced in all the combinations in which it ever occurs.
it cannot, therefore, be introduced first for one combination and
later re- introduced for another. f or example, once negation has
been introduced, we must understand it both in propositions
of the form ‘ ∼p’ and in propositions like ‘ ∼(p v q)’, ‘(∃x).∼fx’,
etc. We must not introduce it first for the one class of cases and
then for the other, since it would then be left in doubt whether its
meaning were the same in both cases, and no reason would have
been given for combining the signs in the same way in both cases.
(in short, f rege’s remarks about introducing signs by means of
definitions (in The Fundamental Laws of Arithmetic ) also apply,
mutatis mutandis, to the introduction of primitive signs.)
      5.452  The introduction of any new device into the symbolism of logic is necessarily a momentous event. in logic a new device should not
be introduced in brackets or in a footnote with what one might
call a completely innocent air.
(Thus in r ussell and Whitehead’s Principia Mathematica  there
occur definitions and primitive propositions expressed in words.
Why this sudden appearance of words? it would require a justifi -
cation, but none is given, or could be given, since the procedure
is in fact illicit.)
But if the introduction of a new device has proved necessary
at a certain point, we must immediately ask ourselves, ‘ at what
points is the employment of this device now unavoidable ?’ and its
place in logic must be made clear.
      5.453  all numbers in logic stand in need of justification. 178or rather, it must become evident that there are no numbers
in logic.
There are no pre- eminent numbers.
      5.454  in logic there is no co- ordinate status, and there can be no classification.
in logic there can be no distinction between the general and the
specific.
        5.4541  The solutions of the problems of logic must be simple, since they set the standard of simplicity.
Men have always had a presentiment that there must be a realm
in which the answers to questions are symmetrically combined –  a
priori –  to form a self- contained system.
a realm subject to the law: simplex sigillum veri.
    5.5  every truth- function is a result of successive applications to elem - entary propositions of the operation ‘(- - - - - T)(ξ, ….)’.
This operation negates all the propositions in the right- hand
pair of brackets, and i call it the negation of those propositions.
      5.501  When a bracketed expression has propositions as its terms –  and the order of the terms inside the brackets is indifferent –  then
i indicate it by a sign of the form ‘( ξ)’. ‘(ξ)’ is a variable whose
values are terms of the bracketed expression and the bar over the
variable indicates that it is the representative of all its values in the
brackets.
(e.g. if ξ has the 3 values P, Q, r, then
() ) ,, . ξ=( ) PQ R
What the values of the variable are is something that is stipulated.
The stipulation is a description of the propositions that have
the variable as their representative.
how the description of the terms of the bracketed expression is
produced is not essential.
We can distinguish three kinds of description: 1. direct enumer -
ation, in which case we can simply substitute for the variable the
constants that are its values; 2. giving a function fx whose values
for all values of x are the propositions to be described; 3. giving
a formal law that governs the construction of the propositions,
in which case the bracketed expression has as its members all the
terms of a series of forms.
      5.502  so instead of ‘(-  -  -  -  - V) (ξ,....)’, i write ‘N( ξ)’. N(ξ) is the negation of all the values of the propositional vari -
able ξ.
      5.503  it is obvious that we can easily express how propositions may be constructed with this operation, and how they may not be
constructed with it; so it must be possible to find an exact expres -
sion for this.
      5.51  if ξ has only one value, then N( ξ) = ~p (not p); if it has two values then N( ξ) = ~p∙~q (neither p nor q).
        5.511  how can logic –  all- embracing logic, which mirrors the world – use such peculiar crotchets and contrivances? only because they
are all connected with one another in an infinitely fine network,
the great mirror.
        5.512  ‘ ∼p’ is true if ‘ p’ is false. Therefore, in the proposition ‘ ∼p’, when it is true, ‘ p’ is a false proposition. how then can the stroke ‘ ∼’ make
it agree with reality?
But in ‘ ∼p’ it is not ‘ ∼’ that negates; it is rather what is common
to all the signs of this notation that negate p.
That is to say the common rule that governs the construction
of ‘∼p’, ‘∼∼∼p’, ‘∼p v ∼p’, ‘∼p .∼p’, etc. etc. (ad inf.). and this
common factor mirrors negation.
        5.513  We might say that what is common to all symbols that affirm both p and q is the proposition ‘ p ∙ q’; and that what is common to all
symbols that affirm either p or q is the proposition ‘ p v q’.
and similarly we can say that two propositions are opposed to
one another if they have nothing in common with one another,
and that every proposition has only one negative, since there is
only one proposition that lies completely outside it.
Thus in r ussell’s notation too it is manifest that ‘ q : p v ∼p’ says
the same thing as ‘ q’, that ‘ p v ∼p’ says nothing.
        5.514  once a notation has been established, there will be in it a rule governing the construction of all propositions that negate p, a rule
governing the construction of all propositions that affirm p, and
a rule governing the construction of all propositions that affirm p
or q; and so on. These rules are equivalent to the symbols; and in
them their sense is mirrored.
        5.5151  Must the sign of a negative proposition be constructed with that of the positive proposition? Why should it not be possible to
express a negative proposition by means of a negative fact? (e.g.
suppose that ‘ a’ does not stand in a certain relation to ‘ b’; then
this might be used to say that aRb was not the case.)
But really even in this case the negative proposition is
constructed by an indirect use of the positive.
The positive proposition  necessarily presupposes the existence
of the negative proposition  and vice versa.
      5.52  if ξ has as its values all the values of a function fx for all values of x, then N( ξ) = ~(∃x).fx.
        5.521  i dissociate the concept all from truth- functions. frege and r ussell introduced generality in association with
logical product or logical sum. This made it difficult to under -
stand the propositions ‘( ∃x).fx’ and ‘( x).fx’, in which both ideas
are embedded.
        5.522  What is peculiar to the generality- sign is first, that it indicates a logical prototype, and secondly, that it gives prominence to
constants.
        5.523  The generality- sign occurs as an argument. 
        5.524  if objects are given, then at the same time we are given all objects. if elementary propositions are given, then at the same time all
elementary propositions are given.
        5.525  it is incorrect to render the proposition ‘( ∃x).fx’ in the words, ‘ fx is possible ’, as r ussell does.
The certainty, possibility, or impossibility of a situation is not
expressed by a proposition, but by an expression’s being a tau -
tology, a proposition with sense, or a contradiction.
The precedent to which we are constantly inclined to appeal
must reside in the symbol itself.
        5.526  We can describe the world completely by means of fully generalized propositions, i.e. without first correlating any name
with a particular object.
Then, in order to arrive at the customary mode of expression,
we simply need to add, after an expression like, ‘There is one and
only one x such that …’, the words, ‘and that x is a’.
          5.5261  a fully generalized proposition, like every other proposition, is composite. (This is shown by the fact that in ‘( ∃x, φ).φx’ we
have to mention ‘ φ’ and ‘ x’ separately. They both, independently,
stand in signifying relations to the world, just as is the case in
ungeneralized propositions.)
it is a mark of a composite symbol that it has something in
common with other  symbols.
          5.5262  The truth or falsity of every  proposition does make some alter - ation in the general construction of the world. and the range that
the totality of elementary propositions leaves open for its con -
struction is exactly the same as that which is delimited by entirely
general propositions.
(if an elementary proposition is true, that means, at any rate,
one more  true elementary proposition.)
      5.53  identity of object i express by identity of sign, and not by using a sign for identity. Difference of objects i express by difference
of signs.
        5.5301  it is self- evident that identity is not a relation between objects. This becomes very clear if one considers, for example, the propos -
ition ‘( x): fx . ⊃ . x = a’. What this proposition says is simply that
only a  satisfies the function f, and not that only things that have a
certain relation to a satisfy the function f.
of course, it might then be said that only a  did have this rela -
tion to a; but in order to express that, we should need the identity-
sign itself.
        5.5302  russell’s definition of ‘=’ is inadequate, because according to it we cannot say that two objects have all their properties in common.
(even if this proposition is never correct, it still has sense .)
        5.5303  roughly speaking, to say of two things that they are identical is nonsense, and to say of one thing that it is identical with itself is
to say nothing at all.
        5.531  Thus i do not write ‘ f(a,b) . a = b’, but ‘ f(a,a)’ (or ‘ f(b,b)’); and not f(a,b) ∙ ∼ a = b ’, but ‘ f(a,b)’.
        5.532  and analogously i do not write ‘( ∃x,y).f(x,y) ∙ x = y ’, but ‘(∃x).f(x,x)’; and not ‘( ∃x,y).f(x,y) . ∼ x = y ’, but ‘( ∃x,y).f(x,y)’.
(so r ussell’s ‘( ∃x,y).fxy’ becomes ‘( ∃x,y).f(x,y).v.(∃x).f(x,x)’.)
          5.5321  Thus, for example, instead of ‘( x):fx ⊃ x = a’ we write ‘( ∃x).fx . ⊃ . fa : ∼(∃x,y).fx.fy’.
and the proposition, ‘ Only one x  satisfies f()’, will read ‘( ∃x)fx :
∼(∃x,y).fx.fy’.
        5.533  The identity- sign, therefore, is not an essential constituent of con - ceptual notation.
        5.534  and now we see that in a correct conceptual notation pseudo- propositions like ‘ a = a ’, ‘a = b  . b = c ⊃ a = c’,
‘(x).x = x’, ‘(∃x). x = a’, etc. cannot even be written down.
        5.535  This also disposes of all the problems that were connected with such pseudo- propositions.
all the problems that r ussell’s ‘axiom of infinity’ brings with it
can be solved at this point.
What the axiom of infinity is intended to say would express
itself in language through the existence of infinitely many names
with different meanings.
          5.5351  There are certain cases in which one is tempted to use expressions of the form ‘ a = a ’ or ‘ p ⊃ p’ and the like. in fact, this happens
when one wants to talk about prototypes, e.g. about proposition,
thing, etc. Thus in r ussell’s Principles of Mathematics  ‘p is a prop -
osition’ –  which is nonsense –  was given the symbolic rendering
‘p ⊃ p’ and placed as an hypothesis in front of certain propos -
itions in order to exclude from their argument- places everything
but propositions.
(it is nonsense to place the hypothesis ‘ p ⊃ p’ in front of a
proposition, in order to ensure that its arguments shall have the
right form, if only because with a non- proposition as argument
the hypothesis becomes not false but nonsensical, and because
arguments of the wrong kind make the proposition itself nonsens -
ical, so that it preserves itself from wrong arguments just as well,
or as badly, as the hypothesis without sense that was appended
for that purpose.)
          5.5352  in the same way people have wanted to express, ‘There are no things ’, by writing ‘ ∼(∃x). x=x’. But even if this were a propos -
ition, would it not be equally true if in fact ‘there were things’ but
they were not identical with themselves?
      5.54  in the general propositional form, propositions occur in other propositions only as bases of truth- operations.
        5.541  at first sight it looks as if it were also possible for one proposition to occur in another in a different way.
Particularly with certain forms of proposition in psychology,
such as ‘ A believes that p is the case’ and ‘ A has the thought p’, etc.
for if these are considered superficially, it looks as if the prop -
osition p stood in some kind of relation to an object A.
(and in modern theory of knowledge (r ussell, Moore, etc.)
these propositions have actually been construed in this way.)
        5.542  it is clear, however, that ‘ A believes that p’, ‘A has the thought p’, and ‘ A says p’ are of the form ‘ “p” says p’: and this does not
involve a correlation of a fact with an object, but rather the cor -
relation of facts by means of the correlation of their objects.
          5.5421  This shows too that there is no such thing as the soul –  the sub - ject, etc. –  as it is conceived in the superficial psychology of the
present day.
indeed a composite soul would no longer be a soul.
          5.5422  The correct explanation of the form of the proposition, ‘ A makes the judgement p’, must show that it is impossible for a judgement
to be a piece of nonsense.
(russell’s theory does not satisfy this requirement.)
          5.5423  To perceive a complex means to perceive that its constituents are related to one another in such and such a way.
This no doubt also explains why there are two possible ways of
seeing the figure
b
b bb
aa
a a
as a cube; and all similar phenomena. f or we really see two
different facts.
(if i look in the first place at the corners marked a and only
glance at the b’s, then the a’s appear to be in front, and vice versa.)
      5.55  We now have to answer a priori the question about all the possible forms of elementary propositions.
elementary propositions consist of names. since, however, we
are unable to give the number of names with different meanings,
we are also unable to give the composition of elementary
propositions.
        5.551  our fundamental principle is that whenever a question can be decided by logic at all it must be possible to decide it without
more ado.
(and if we get into a position where we have to look at the
world for an answer to such a problem, that shows that we are on
a completely wrong track.)
        5.552  The ‘experience’ that we need in order to understand logic is not that something or other is the state of things, but that something
is: that, however, is not an experience.
Logic is prior  to every experience –  that something is so.
it is prior to the question ‘how?’, not prior to the question
‘What?’
          5.5521  and if this were not so, how could we apply logic? We might put it in this way: if there would be a logic even if there were no world,
how then could there be a logic given that there is a world?
        5.553  russell said that there were simple relations between different numbers of things (individuals). But between what numbers? and
how is this supposed to be decided? –  By experience?
(There is no privileged number.)
        5.554  it would be completely arbitrary to give any specific form. 
          5.5541  it is supposed to be possible to answer a priori the question whether i can get into a position in which i need the sign for a
27- termed relation in order to signify something.
          5.5542  But is it really legitimate even to ask such a question? can we set up a form of sign without knowing whether any -
thing can correspond to it?
Does it make sense to ask what there must be in order that
something can be the case?
        5.555  clearly we have some concept of elementary propositions quite apart from their particular logical forms.
But when there is a system by which we can create symbols,
the system is what is important for logic and not the individual
symbols.
and anyway, is it really possible that in logic i should have to
deal with forms that i can invent? What i have to deal with must
be that which makes it possible for me to invent them.
        5.557  The application  of logic decides what elementary propositions there are.
What belongs to its application, logic cannot anticipate.
it is clear that logic must not clash with its application.
But logic has to be in contact with its application.
Therefore logic and its application must not overlap.
          5.5571  if i cannot say a priori what elementary propositions there are, then the attempt to do so must lead to obvious nonsense.
        5.5561  empirical reality is limited by the totality of objects. The limit also makes itself manifest in the totality of elementary propositions.
hierarchies are and must be independent of reality.
        5.5562  if we know on purely logical grounds that there must be elemen - tary propositions, then everyone who understands propositions in
their unanalysed form must know it.
        5.5563  in fact, all the propositions of our everyday language, just as they stand, are in perfect logical order. –  That utterly simple thing,
which we have to formulate here, is not a likeness of the truth, but
the truth itself in its entirety.
(our problems are not abstract, but perhaps the most concrete
that there are.)
    5.6  The limits of my language  mean the limits of my world. 
      5.61  Logic pervades the world: the limits of the world are also its limits. so we cannot say in logic, ‘The world has this in it, and this,
but not that’.
for that would appear to presuppose that we were excluding
certain possibilities, and this cannot be the case, since it would
require that logic should go beyond the limits of the world; for
only in that way could it view those limits from the other side
as well.
We cannot think what we cannot think; so what we cannot
think we cannot say either.
      5.62  This remark provides the key to the problem, how much truth there is in solipsism.
for what the solipsist means  is quite correct; only it cannot be
said, but makes itself manifest.
The world is my world: this is manifest in the fact that the limits
of language  (of that language which alone i understand) mean the
limits of my world.
        5.621  The world and life are one. 
      5.63  i am my world. (The microcosm.) 
        5.631  There is no such thing as the subject that thinks or entertains ideas. if i wrote a book called ‘The world as i found it’, i should have
to include a report on my body, and should have to say which
parts are subordinated to my will, and which were not, etc., this
being a method of isolating the subject, or rather of showing that
in an important sense there is no subject; for it alone could not be
mentioned in that book. –
        5.632  The subject does not belong to the world: rather, it is a limit of the world.
        5.633  Where in the world is a metaphysical subject to be found? Y ou say10 that this is exactly like the case of the eye and the
visual field. But really you do not see the eye.
and nothing in the field of sight  allows inferring11 that it is seen
by an eye.
          5.6331  f or the visual field has not a form like this:15 
        5.634  This is connected with the fact that no part of our experience is also12 a priori.
Whatever we see could also13 be other than it is.
Whatever we can describe at all could also14 be other than it is.
There is no a priori  order of things.
      5.64  here it can be seen that solipsism, when its implications are followed out strictly, coincides with pure realism. The self of sol -
ipsism shrinks to a point without extension, and there remains the
reality co- ordinated with it.
        5.641  Thus there really is a sense in which philosophy can talk about the self in a non- psychological way.
What brings the self into philosophy is the fact that ‘the world
is my world’.
The philosophical self is not the human being, not the human
body, or the human soul, with which psychology deals, but rather
the metaphysical subject, the limit of the world –  not a part of it.
2096. (001- 002)
The general form of a truth- function is: p  N,, ()ξξ .
This is the general form of a proposition.
  6  The general form of a truth- function is: [ p, ξ, N(ξ)]. This is the general form of a proposition.
    6.001  What this says is just that every proposition is a result of successive applications to elementary propositions of the operation N(ξ).
    6.002  if we are given the general form according to which propositions are constructed, then with it we are also given the general form
according to which one proposition can be generated out of
another by means of an operation.
2106. (01- 03)
The general form of a truth- function is:  p N,, ()ξξ.
This is the general form of proposition.
    6.01  Therefore the general form of an operation Ω’( η) is: ξξ ηη ξξ ,’ ,, . NN()() = () ()
This is the most general form of transition from one propos -
ition to another.
    6.02  and this is how we arrive at numbers. i give the definitions x = Ω0’x Def.
and Ω’Ω ν’x = Ων+1’x Def.
so, in accordance with these rules, which deal with signs, we
write the series
x, Ω’x, Ω’Ω’ x, Ω’Ω’Ω’ x, ...,
in the following way
Ω0’x, Ω0+1’x, Ω0+1+1’x, Ω0+1+1+1’x, ... .
Therefore, instead of ‘[ x, ξ, Ω’ξ]’,
i write ‘[Ω0’x, Ων’x, Ων+1’x]’.
and i give the following definitions
0+1 = 1 Def.,
0+1+1 = 2 Def.,
0+1+1+1 = 3 Def.,
(and so on).
      6.021  a number is the exponent of an operation. 
      6.022  The concept of number is simply what is common to all numbers, the general form of a number.
The concept of number is the variable number.
and the concept of numerical equality is the general form of
all particular cases of numerical equality.
    6.03  The general form of an integer is [0, ξ, ξ+1]. 
      6.031  The theory of classes is completely superfluous in mathematics. This is connected with the fact that the generality required in
mathematics is not accidental  generality.
2136.
The general form of a truth- function is: p N,, ()ξξ.
This is the general form of a proposition.
    6.1  The propositions of logic are tautologies. 
      6.11  Therefore the propositions of logic say nothing. (They are the analytic propositions.)
        6.111  all theories which make a proposition of logic appear to have content are false. one might think, for example, that the words
‘true’ and ‘false’ signify two properties among other properties,
and then it would seem to be a remarkable fact that every prop -
osition possesses one of these properties. on this theory it seems
to be anything but obvious, just as, for instance, the proposition
‘all roses are either yellow or red’, would not sound obvious even
if it were true. indeed, the logical proposition acquires all the
characteristics of a proposition of natural science and this is the
sure sign that it has been construed wrongly.
        6.112  The correct explanation of the propositions of logic must assign to them a unique status among all propositions.
        6.113  it is the peculiar mark of logical propositions that one can rec - ognize that they are true from the symbol alone, and this fact
contains in itself the whole philosophy of logic. and so too it is a
very important fact that the truth or falsity of non- logical prop -
ositions cannot  be recognized from the propositions alone.
      6.12  The fact that the propositions of logic are tautologies shows  the formal –  logical –  properties of language and the world.
The fact that a tautology is yielded by this particular way
of connecting its constituents characterizes the logic of its
constituents.
if propositions are to yield a tautology when they are connected
in a certain way, they must have certain structural properties. so
their yielding a tautology when combined in this way  shows that
they possess these structural properties.
        6.1201  for example, the fact that the propositions ‘ p’ and ‘ ∼p’ in the combination ‘ ∼(p.∼p)’ yield a tautology shows that they contra -
dict one another. The fact that the propositions ‘ p ⊃ q’, ‘p’, and
‘q’, combined with one another in the form ‘( p ⊃ q).(p) : ⊃ : (q)’,
yield a tautology shows that q follows from p and p ⊃ q. The fact
that ‘( x).fx : ⊃ : fa’ is a tautology shows that fa follows from ( x).fx.
etc. etc.
        6.1202  it is clear that one could achieve the same purpose by using contradictions instead of tautologies.
        6.1203  in order to recognize an expression as a tautology, in cases where no generality- sign occurs in it, one can employ the following intui -
tive method: instead of ‘p’, ‘q’, ‘r’, etc., i write ‘Tpf’, ‘Tqf’, ‘Trf’,
etc. Truth- combinations i express by means of brackets, e.g.:
TTpF Fq
and i use lines to express the correlation of the truth or falsity of
the whole proposition with the truth- combinations of its truth-
arguments, in the following way:
217TT
TpF FF
q
so this sign, for instance, would represent the proposition p ⊃ q.
Now, by way of example, i wish to examine the proposition ∼(p.∼p)
(the law of contradiction) in order to determine whether it is a
tautology. in our notation the form ‘ ∼ξ’ is written as
T
F‘T ξ F’
and the form ‘ ξ. η’ as
T ξ FT  ηF
FT
hence the proposition ~( p.~q) reads as follows:
T
TTT
TpF
F
FFF
q
if we here substitute ‘ p’ for ‘ q’ and examine how the outermost
T and f are connected with the innermost ones, the result will be
that the truth of the whole proposition is correlated with all the
truth- combinations of its argument, and its falsity with none of
the truth- combinations.
        6.121  The propositions of logic demonstrate the logical properties of propositions by combining them so as to form propositions which
say nothing.
This method could also be called a zero- method. in a logical
proposition, propositions are brought into equilibrium with one
another, and the state of equilibrium then indicates what the
logical constitution of these propositions must be.
        6.122  it follows from this that we can actually do without logical prop - ositions; for in a suitable notation we can in fact recognize the
formal properties of propositions by mere inspection of the prop -
ositions themselves.
          6.1221  if, for example, two propositions ‘ p’ and ‘ q’ in the combination ‘p ⊃ q’ yield a tautology, then it is clear that q follows from p.
for example, we see from the two propositions themselves that
‘q’ follows from ‘ p ⊃ q ∙ p’, but it is also possible to show it in this
way: we combine them to form ‘ p ⊃ q ∙ p : ⊃ : q’, and then show
that this is a tautology.
          6.1222  This throws some light on the question why logical propositions cannot be confirmed by experience any more than they can be
refuted by it. Not only must a proposition of logic be irrefutable
by any possible experience, but it must also be unconfirmable by
any possible experience.
          6.1223  Now it becomes clear why people have often felt as if it were for us to ‘postulate ’ the ‘truths of logic’. The reason is that we can postu -
late them in so far as we can postulate an adequate notation.
          6.1224  it also becomes clear now why logic was called the theory of forms and of inference.
        6.123  clearly the laws of logic cannot in their turn be subject to laws of logic.
(There is not, as r ussell thought, a special law of contradiction
for each ‘type’; one law is enough, since it is not applied to itself.)
          6.1231  The mark of a logical proposition is not general validity. To be general means no more than to be accidentally valid for
all things. an ungeneralized proposition can be tautological just
as well as a generalized one.
          6.1232  The general validity of logic might be called essential, in contrast with the accidental general validity of such propositions as ‘ all
men are mortal’. Propositions like r ussell’s ‘axiom of reduci -
bility’ are not logical propositions, and this explains our feeling
that, even if they were true, their truth could only be the result of
a fortunate accident.
          6.1233  it is possible to imagine a world in which the axiom of reducibility is not valid. it is clear, however, that logic has nothing to do with
the question whether our world really is like that or not.
        6.124  The propositions of logic describe the scaffolding of the world, or rather they represent it. They have no ‘subject- matter’. They
presuppose that names have meaning and elementary propos -
itions sense; and that is their connexion with the world. it is clear
that something about the world must be indicated by the fact
that certain combinations of symbols –  whose essence involves
the possession of a determinate character –  are tautologies.
This contains the decisive point. We have said that something is
219arbitrary in the symbols that we use and that some things are not.
in logic it is only the latter that expresses: but that means that
logic is not a field in which we express what we wish with the help
of signs, but rather one in which the nature of the natural and
inevitable signs speaks for itself. if we know the logical syntax of
any sign- language, then we have already been given all the prop -
ositions of logic.
        6.125  it is possible –  indeed possible even according to the old concep - tion of logic –  to give in advance a description of all ‘true’ logical
propositions.
          6.1251  hence there can never  be surprises in logic. 
        6.126  one can calculate whether a proposition belongs to logic, by cal - culating the logical properties of the symbol .
and this is what we do when we ‘prove’ a logical proposition.
for, without bothering about sense or meaning, we construct
the logical propositions out of others using only rules that deal
with signs .
The proof of logical propositions consists in the following pro -
cess: we produce them out of other logical propositions by suc -
cessively applying certain operations that always generate further
tautologies out of the initial ones. (and in fact only tautologies
follow  from a tautology.)
of course this way of showing that the propositions of logic
are tautologies is not at all essential to logic, if only because the
propositions from which the proof starts must show without any
proof that they are tautologies.
          6.1261  in logic process and result are equivalent. (hence the absence of surprise.)
          6.1262  Proof in logic is merely a mechanical expedient to facilitate the recognition of tautologies in complicated cases.
          6.1263  indeed, it would be altogether too remarkable if a proposition that had sense could be proved logically  from others, and so too
could a logical proposition. it is clear from the start that a logical
proof of a proposition that has sense and a proof in logic must be
two entirely different things.
          6.1264  a proposition that has sense states something, which is shown by its proof to be so. in logic every proposition is the form of
a proof.
every proposition of logic is a modus ponens represented in
signs. (and one cannot express the modus ponens by means of a
proposition.)
          6.1265  it is always possible to construe logic in such a way that every proposition is its own proof.
        6.127  all the propositions of logic are of equal status: it is not the case that some of them are essentially primitive propositions and
others essentially derived propositions.
every tautology itself shows that it is a tautology.
          6.1271  it is clear that the number of the ‘primitive propositions of logic’ is arbitrary, since one could derive logic from a single primitive
proposition, e.g. by simply constructing the logical product of
frege’s primitive propositions. (f rege would perhaps say that we
should then no longer have an immediately self- evident primitive
proposition. But it is remarkable that a thinker as rigorous as
frege appealed to the degree of self- evidence as the criterion of a
logical proposition.)
      6.13  Logic is not a body of doctrine, but a mirror- image of the world. Logic is transcendental.
    6.2  Mathematics is a logical method. The propositions of mathematics are equations, and therefore
pseudo- propositions.
      6.21  a proposition of mathematics does not express a thought. 
        6.211  indeed in real life a mathematical proposition is never what we want. r ather, we make use of mathematical propositions only in
inferences from propositions that do not belong to mathematics
to others that likewise do not belong to mathematics.
(in philosophy the question, ‘What do we actually use this word
or this proposition for?’ repeatedly leads to valuable insights.)
      6.22  The logic of the world, which is shown in tautologies by the prop - ositions of logic, is shown in equations by mathematics.
      6.23  if two expressions are combined by means of the sign of equality, that means that they can be substituted for one another. But it
must be manifest in the two expressions themselves whether this
is the case or not.
When two expressions can be substituted for one another, that
characterizes their logical form.
        6.231  it is a property of affirmation that it can be construed as double negation.
it is a property of ‘1+1+1+1’ that it can be construed as
‘(1+1) + (1+1)’.
        6.232  frege says that the two expressions have the same meaning but different senses.
But the essential point about an equation is that it is not neces -
sary in order to show that the two expressions connected by the
sign of equality have the same meaning, since this can be seen
from the two expressions themselves.
          6.2321  and the possibility of proving the propositions of mathematics means simply that their correctness can be perceived without its
being necessary that what they express should itself be compared
with the facts in order to determine its correctness.
          6.2322  it is impossible to assert  the identity of the meaning of two expressions. f or in order to be able to assert anything about their
meaning, i must know their meaning, and i cannot know their
meaning without knowing whether what they mean is the same or
different.
          6.2323  an equation merely marks the point of view from which i con - sider the two expressions: it marks their equivalence in meaning.
        6.233  The question whether intuition is needed for the solution of mathematical problems must be given the answer that in this case
language itself provides the necessary intuition.
          6.2331  The process of calculating  serves to bring about that intuition. calculation is not an experiment.
        6.234  Mathematics is a method of logic. 
          6.2341  it is the essential characteristic of mathematical method that it employs equations. f or it is because of this method that every
proposition of mathematics must go without saying.
      6.24  The method by which mathematics arrives at its equations is the method of substitution.
for equations express the substitutability of two expressions
and, starting from a number of equations, we advance to new
equations by substituting different expressions in accordance
with the equations.
        6.241  Thus the proof of the proposition 2 × 2 = 4 runs as follows: (Ων)μ’x = Ων×μ’x Def.,
Ω2×2’x = (Ω2)2’x = (Ω2)1+1’x = Ω2’Ω2’x = Ω1+1’Ω1+1’x
= (Ω’Ω)’ (Ω’Ω)’x = Ω’Ω’Ω’Ω’ x = Ω1+1+1+1’x = Ω4’x.
    6.3  The exploration of logic means the exploration of everything that is subject to law . and outside logic everything is accidental.
      6.31  The so- called law of induction cannot possibly be a law of logic, since it is obviously a proposition with sense. –  Nor, therefore, can
it be an a priori law.
      6.32  The law of causality is not a law but the form of a law. 
        6.321  ‘Law of causality’ –  that is a general name. and just as in mechanics, for example, there are ‘minimum- principles’, such as
the law of least action, so too in physics there are causal laws, laws
of the causal form.
      6.33  We do not have a priori belief  in a law of conservation, but rather a priori knowledge  of the possibility of a logical form.
      6.34  all such propositions, including the principle of sufficient reason, the laws of continuity in nature and of least effort in nature, etc.
etc. –  all these are a priori insights about the forms in which the
propositions of science can be cast.
        6.341  Newtonian mechanics, for example, imposes a unified form on the description of the world. Let us imagine a white surface with
irregular black spots on it. We then say that whatever kind of
picture these make, i can always approximate as near as i wish
to description of it by covering the surface with a sufficiently fine
square mesh, and then saying of every square whether it is white
or black. in this way i shall have imposed a unified form on the
description of the surface. The form is optional, since i could have
achieved the same result by using a net with a triangular or hex -
agonal mesh. Possibly the use a triangular mesh would have made
the description simpler; that is to say, it might be that we could
describe the surface more accurately with a coarse triangular
mesh than with a fine square mesh (or conversely), and so on.
The different nets correspond to different systems for describing
the world. Mechanics determines one form of description of the
world by saying that all propositions used in the description of the
world must be obtained in a given way from a given set of prop -
ositions –  the axioms of mechanics. it thus supplies the bricks for
building the edifice of science, and it says: ‘ any building that you
want to erect, whatever it may be, must somehow be constructed
with these bricks, and with these alone.
(Just as with the number- system we must be able to write down
any number we wish, so with the system of mechanics we must be
able to write down any proposition of physics that we wish.)
        6.342  and now we can see the relative position of logic and mechanics. (The net might also consist of more than one kind of mesh: e.g.
we could use both triangles and hexagons.) The possibility of
describing a picture like the one mentioned above with a net of a
given form tells nothing  about the picture. (f or that is true of all
such pictures.) But what does characterize the picture is that it can
236be described completely  by a particular net with a particular  size
of mesh.
similarly the possibility of describing the world by means of
Newtonian mechanics tells us nothing about the world: but what
does tell us something about it is the precise way in which it is
possible to describe it by these means. We are also told something
about the world by the fact that it can be described more simply
with one system of mechanics than with another.
        6.343  Mechanics is an attempt to construct according to a single plan all the true propositions that we need for the description of
the world.
          6.3431  The laws of physics, with all their logical apparatus, still speak, however indirectly, about the objects of the world.
          6.3432  We ought not to forget that any description of the world by means of mechanics will be of the complete general kind. f or example, it
will never mention particular  point- masses: it will only talk about
any point- masses whatsoever .
      6.35  although the spots in our picture are geometrical figures, nevertheless geometry can obviously say nothing at all about
their actual form and position. The network, however, is purely
geometrical; all its properties can be given a priori.
Laws like the principle of sufficient reason, etc., are about the
net and not about what the net describes.
      6.36  if there were a law of causality, it might be put in the following way: There are laws of nature.
But of course that cannot be said: it makes itself manifest.
        6.361  one might say, using hertz’s terminology, that only connections that are subject to low  are thinkable .
          6.3611  We cannot compare a process with the ‘passage of time’ –  there is no such thing –  but only with another process (such as the
working of a chronometer).
hence we can describe the lapse of time only by relying on
some other process.
something exactly analogous applies to space: e.g. when people
say that neither of two events (which exclude one another) can
occur, because there is nothing to cause  the one should to occur
rather than the other, it is really a matter of our being unable to
describe one of the two events unless there is some sort of asym -
metry to be found. and if such an asymmetry is to be found, we
can regard it as the cause  of the occurrence of the one and the
non- occurrence of the other.
            6.36111  Kant’s problem about the right hand and the left hand, which cannot be made to coincide, exists even in two dimensions.
indeed, it exists in one- dimensional space
ab× ×
in which the two congruent figures, a and b, cannot be made to
coincide unless they are moved out of this space. The right hand
and the left hand are in fact completely congruent. it is quite
irrelevant that they cannot be made to coincide.
a right- hand glove could be put on the left hand, if it could be
turned round in four- dimensional space.
        6.362  What can be described can happen too: and what the law of causality is meant to exclude cannot even be described.
        6.363  The procedure of induction consists in accepting as true the simplest  law that can be reconciled with our experience.
          6.3631  This procedure, however, has no logical justification but only a psychological one.
it is clear that there are no grounds for believing that the
simplest eventuality will in fact be realized.
            6.36311  it is an hypothesis that the sun will rise tomorrow: and this means that we do not know  whether it
will rise.
      6.37  There is no compulsion making one thing happen because another has happened. The only necessity that exists is logical  necessity.
        6.371  The whole modern conception of the world is founded on the illusion that the so- called laws of nature are the explanations of
natural phenomena.
        6.372  Thus people today stop at the laws of nature, treating them as something inviolable, just as god and f ate were treated in
past ages.
and in fact both are right and both wrong: though the view
of the ancients is clearer in so far as they have a clear and
acknowledged terminus, while the modern system tries to make it
look as if everything  were explained.
        6.373  The world is independent of my will. 
        6.374  even if all that we wish for were to happen, still this would only be a favour granted by fate, so to speak: for there is no logical  con-
nexion between the will and the world, which would guarantee it,
and the supposed physical connexion itself is surely not some -
thing that we could will.
        6.375  Just as the only necessity that exists is logical  necessity, so too the only impossibility that exists is logical  impossibility.
          6.3751  for example, the simultaneous presence of two colours at the same place in the visual field is impossible, in fact logical impos -
sible, since it is ruled out by the logical structure of colour.
Let us think how this contradiction appears in physics: more or
less as follows –  a particle cannot have two velocities at the same
time; that is to say, it cannot be in two places at the same time,
that is to say, particles that are in different places at the same time
cannot be identical.
(it is clear that the logical product of two elementary prop -
ositions can neither be a tautology nor a contradiction. The
statement that a point in the visual field has two different colours
at the same time is a contradiction.)
    6.4  all propositions are of equal value. 
      6.41  The sense of the world must lie outside the world. in the world everything is as it is, and everything happens as it does happen: in
it no value exists –  and if it did exist, it would have no value.
if there is any value that does have value, it must lie outside
the whole sphere of what happens and is the case. f or all that
happens and is the case and is accidental.
What makes it non- accidental cannot lie within  the world, since
if it did it would itself be accidental.
it must lie outside the world.
      6.42  so too it is impossible for there to be propositions of ethics. Propositions can express nothing that is higher.
        6.421  it is clear that ethics cannot be put into words. ethics is transcendental.
(ethics and aesthetics are one and the same.)
        6.422  When an ethical law of the form. ‘Thou shalt ...’, is laid down, one’s first thought is, ‘ and what if i do not do it?’ it is clear, however,
that ethics has nothing to do with punishment and reward in the
usual sense of the terms. so our question about the consequences
of an action must be unimportant. –  at least those consequences
should not be events. f or there must be something right about the
question we posed. There must indeed be some kind of ethical
reward and ethical punishment, but they must reside in the action
itself.
(and is also clear that the reward must be something pleasant
and the punishment something unpleasant.)
        6.423  it is impossible to speak about the will in so far as it is the subject of ethical attributes.
and the will as a phenomenon is of interest only to psychology.
      6.43  if the good or bad exercise of the will alter the world, it can alter only the limits of the world, not the facts –  not what can be
expressed by means of language.
in short the effect must be that it becomes an altogether
different world. it must, so to speak, wax and wane as a whole.
The world of the happy man is a different one from that of the
unhappy man.
        6.431  so too at death the world does not alter, but comes to an end. 
          6.4311  Death is not an event in life: we do not live to experience death. if we take eternity to mean not infinite temporal duration but
timelessness, then eternal life belongs to those who live in the
present.
our life has no end in just the way in which our visual field has
no limits.
          6.4312  Not only is there in no way guarantee of the temporal immor - tality of the human soul, that is to say of its eternal survival after
death; but, in any case, this assumption completely fails to accom -
plish the purpose for which it has always been intended. or is
some riddle solved by my surviving for ever? is not this eternal life
itself as much of a riddle as our present life? The solution of the
riddle of life in space and time lies outside  space and time.
(it is certainly not the solution of any problems of natural
science that is required.)
        6.432  How  things are in the world is a matter of complete indifference for what is higher. god does not reveal himself in the world.
          6.4321  The facts all contribute only to setting the problem, not to its solution.
      6.44  it is not how things are in the world that is mystical, but that it exists.
      6.45  To view the world sub specie aeterni is to view it as whole –  a limited whole.
feeling the world as a limited whole –  it is this that is mystical.
    6.5  When the answer cannot be put into words, neither can the question be put into words.
The riddle  does not exist.
if a question can be framed at all, it is also possible  to answer it.
      6.51  scepticism is not irrefutable, but obviously nonsensical, when it tries to raise doubts where no questions can be asked.
for doubt can exist only where a question exists, a question
only where an answer exists, and an answer only where something
can be said .
      6.52  We feel that even when all possible  scientific questions have been answered, the problems of life remain completely untouched.
of course there are then no questions left, and this itself is the
answer.
        6.521  The solution of the problem of life is seen in the vanishing of the problem.
(is not this the reason why those who have found after a long
period of doubt that the sense of life became clear to them have
then been unable to say what constituted that sense?)
      6.53  The correct method in philosophy would really be the following: to say nothing except what can be said, i.e. propositions of natural
science, –  i.e. something that has nothing to do with philosophy –
and then, whenever someone else wanted to say something meta -
physical, to demonstrate to him that he had failed to give a
meaning to certain signs in his propositions. although it would
not be satisfying to the other person –  he would not have the
feeling that we were teaching him philosophy –  this method would
be the only strictly correct one.
      6.54  My propositions serve as elucidation in the following way: anyone who understands me eventually recognizes them as nonsensical,
when he has climbed out through them, on them, over them.16
(he must, so to speak, throw away the ladder after he has climbed
up it.)
he must transcend these propositions, and then he will see the
world aright.
  7  What we cannot speak about we must pass over in silence. 
